Title: 2606.19280v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.19280v1

Published Time: Thu, 18 Jun 2026 01:16:14 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
CollaboratoR: A scalable workflow for collaborative data entry and management 

Patrick Bills 1, 2*, Ashwini Ramesh 1,3,4,5 , Laís Petri 1,4,6,7 , Alejandra Martínez Blancas 1,4,6,8 , Kelly Kapsar 1,3,4 , Amar 

Deep Tiwari 1,9 and Phoebe L. Zarnetske 1,3,4 

*corresponding author: billspat@msu.edu 

> 1.The Institute for Biodiversity, Ecology, Evolution, and Macrosystems (IBEEM), Michigan State University, East Lansing, Mich igan, USA 2. The Institute for Cyber -Enabled
> Research (ICER), Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA 3. Department of Int egrative Biology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, 48824, USA 4.
> Ecology, Evolution and Behavior Program, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, 48824, USA 5. Yale Institute of Biosphe ric Sciences, Yale University, New Haven,
> CT, USA 6. D epartment of Plant Biology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, 48824, USA 7. School of Biological Sciences, Souther n Illinois University -Carbondale,
> Carbondale, Illinois, USA 8. Department of Biological Sciences, University of Texas, El Paso, Tex as, USA 9. Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Michigan
> State University, East Lansing, MI, 48824, USA

Abstract: 

Effective collaborative data entry and transparency are foundational for building robust databases and 

conducting high -quality data synthesis. Yet, researchers often encounter challenges with inconsistent data 

entries, inadvertently introducing "smudges" ( e.g., errors, misreadings, and inconsistencies) that compromise 

data integrity. Despite the growing use of open -source tools, many researchers still rely on inefficient formats 

or costly commercial platforms, whereas fewer adopt complex open -source solutio ns. These costs and 

inefficiencies slow down workflows, hindering researchers’ ability to efficiently build foundational databases 

for synthesis research including meta -analyses. To address these challenges, we built upon previous 

frameworks to develop collaboratoR , an open -source, end -to -end workflow that utilizes Google Sheets for 

collaborative data entry and GitHub for version control, adhering to FAIR data principles. collaboratoR fills the 

gap between ad -hoc spreadsheets and complex systems for data extraction in meta -analyses. We created 

collaboratoR as a customizable R package to automate data validation and aggregation, ensuring consistency 

and transparency. Data are entered into shared Google Sheets, validated, and pushed to GitHub for version 

control. After verification, the data are re -validated t o ensure accuracy before finalizing. Tested in two case 

studies —plant competition and avian interaction databases —collaboratoR demonstrated its effectiveness in 

managing large collaborative datasets. Across both case studies, automated validation flagged common entry 

and formatting issues early, improving traceability and reducing time spent on post -hoc cleaning. This scalable 

framework can be applied across disciplines where meta -analyses play a critical role in data -driven decision -

making, such as social science, ecology, and medical and pharmaceutical research. As a future direction, 

collaboratoR’s automated validation can be incorporated into a Continuous Integration (CI) pipeline to run 

QA/QC on each update and provide rapid feedback to contributors. Ultimately, collaboratoR sets a new 

benchmark for efficient, transparent, and reproducible collaborative data management, minimizing "smudges" 

and enhancing research synthesis across fields and industries alike. 

Keywords : collaborative data entry, version control, Environmental Data Initiative, data curation, 

transparency, reproducible workflow, AvianMetaNetwork 

Research Synthesis Keywords : multi -authored database, collaborative research, reproducibility, version 

control, transparency Highlights 

What is already known 

● Collaborative data entry and data transparency are two of the key underpinnings of any synthesis 

research, including systematic review and meta -analyses. 

● Researchers commonly find themselves revisiting and correcting data entries, inadvertently 

introducing “smudges” (e.g., errors, misreadings, and inconsistencies) that can compromise the 

integrity of the data. 

● Many researchers continue using CSVs, some rely on costly commercial platforms that lack important 

features for a meta -analysis, and a few others turn to open -source tools that require complex 

programming, limiting domain experts' control (e.g., non -IT or Computer Science researchers). 

● Existing workflows that use GitHub -mediated Quality Assurance/Quality Control (QA/QC) and 

Continuous Integration (CI) pipelines to automate error checking provide an excellent foundation. 

However, they are often not end -to -end open source and are rarely implemented to construct 

databases fo r meta -analyses. 

● These challenges underscore the urgent need for a more accessible and efficient collaborative 

framework: a low barrier -to -entry and low -cost workflow to streamline collaborative data entry and 

ensure seamless validation in data management. 

What is new 

● In the new collaboratoR workflow, we designed a pipeline that enables collaborative data entry, tracks 

changes with the git version control system, and transforms data into “comma separated values” (CSV) 

files. 

● Data are entered in Google Sheets within a collaborative cloud file system, and each file is validated 

against predefined rules before being pushed to GitHub for tracking. 

● This process ensures data consistency and transparency, with all subsequent changes tracked via 

Git, aligning with FAIR data practices. 

● collaboratoR incorporates multiple harmonization levels and derived data products, ensuring 

standardized, reproducible data management across various fields. 

● We provide worked examples of how to implement this collaborative workflow for a plant competition 

meta -analysis and an avian interactions database (AvianMetaNetwork). 

Potential impact for readers outside the field 

● Discussions of data science invariably describe techniques for cleaning and 'wrangling' existing data 

sets, but rarely describe the crucial first step of collecting and entering data effectively and accurately 

in a collaboration. 

● The collaboratoR workflow is versatile and can be applied across disciplines, using open -source tools 

like R, CSV formats, and git for end -to -end data management and analysis, while automating the 

integration of commercial services from Google Workspace and Github for eac h of use. 

● It provides a scalable framework for collaborative data management that can be adopted by various 

research fields, where data synthesis is pivotal (e.g., social sciences, medicine, and ecology). 

● The collaboratoR workflow can aid collaborative research efforts in multiple sectors (e.g., academia, 

government, non -governmental organizations, and industry); for example, in biomedical companies 

analyzing data from clinical trials.. 

● By setting a benchmark for data entry of future synthesis with the collaboratoR workflow, we provide 

a new frontier for research synthesis while also identifying opportunities and new directions for 

research. Introduction :

Synthesis research integrates data across studies to address questions at scales no single 

investigation can reach (Gurevitch et al. 2018). Large -scale collaborative efforts, perhaps most famously the 

Human Genome Project, have demonstrated the transformat ive potential of combining data across institutions 

and disciplines (Collins et al. 2003). Similarly, coordinated research observation networks like the National 

Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) ( Schimel et al 2007 ) or coordinated experimental networks like 

Nutrient Network (Borer et al 2014), have effectively scaled up local measurements to continental and global 

scales (National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, 2025). Realizing this potential, how ever, 

depends on a deceptively simple question: how can teams, even with modest group size and budget, collect, 

enter, and manage shared data reliably? Collaborative data entry harnesses the expertise of diverse teams 

to handle complex, multifaceted datase ts more effectively, especially in fields such as ecology, medicine, and 

social sciences (Stokols et al 2008; Wuchty et al 2007; Michelle et al 2010; Brun et al 2025). In meta -analysis, 

for example, researchers with specific knowledge about the studies bei ng reviewed can ensure that data are 

entered consistently and accurately, despite the nuances of each original study (Gurevitch et al 2018). 

Working collectively not only speeds up data collection and entry but also provides a mechanism to identify 

and cor rect biases in data entry process (Brun et al 2025). Furthermore, collaborative data entry fosters 

accountability and transparency —principles that are critical in multiple sectors (e.g., academia, government, 

non -governmental organizations, industry). Seve ral prominent corporations leverage collaborative methods 

in their meta -analysis services, working with biomedical companies to analyze data across multiple clinical 

trials (Berlin et al 2019). This approach allows, for example, the comparison of treatment efficacy across 

multiple clinical trials, ensuring that both the methodological rigor and the relevant domain expertise needed 

to interpret the results effectively are met (Lane et al 2013). Ultimately, a well -documented collaborative 

approach can foster accountability, strengthen reproducibility, and accelerate research synthesis. 

In many cases, collaborative data entry and subsequent validation are fraught with numerous 

challenges (Koesten et al 2019). First, version control becomes nearly impossible when data are entered 

across multiple spreadsheet editors, including Excel and clo ud systems. As a result, critical updates are often 

lost or overlooked (Lakens et al 2016). Lack of version control further exacerbates data integrity issues, 

especially where access controls or audit trails are absent, leaving data open to errors or tampe ring (Burchinal 

& Neebe 2006). Consistent with these risks, over the last two decades, >16,000 (of 49,979) retraction records 

in scientific literature were attributed to data problems alone (Hu et al 2025). Second, when real -time 

collaboration tools are la cking, team members often work in isolation, which creates delays, 

miscommunications, and inconsistencies in data entry (Torka et al 2021; Borer et al 2009). Even with clearly 

defined protocols, team members may interpret instructions differently, introduc ing errors that compromise 

data quality (Winowiecki et al 2011). Third, post -hoc error identification and correction tend to be slow and 

inefficient. Once the data from multiple studies are merged, errors become more difficult to isolate, often 

leaving a s ingle person to harmonize the data —a bottleneck that further delays the process (Fowler et al 

2017). Fourth, inconsistent formatting and a lack of standardization across contributors create major hurdles 

for efficient data merging and analysis (Marx 2013). As the size of the dataset increases, it becomes nearly 

impossible to enter data manually and validate it, with more chances of errors. Finally, compounding these 

challenges, research indicates that database pre -analysis tasks such as search, retrieval, a nd development 

can require an average of 588 hours per study (Allen & Olkin 1999; Marx 2013). This lengthy process creates 

a significant barrier for researchers trying to resolve data issues during the analysis stage. Taken together, 

these persistent chall enges underscore an urgent need for a new, more streamlined and transparent approach 

to collaborative data management. 

Development platforms already exist to build custom forms and systems for collaborative data entry. 

However, data entry systems of all types require the deployment of servers to share resources. Even platforms 

that allow non -programmers to create data entr y forms with simple user interfaces require technical expertise 

to develop and deploy (Yadav 2024). Moreover, many data entry software solutions are designed with 

commercial use -cases in mind and are often neither open nor web -based, or are platform -specif ic. As a result, 

they frequently fall short of meeting the needs of research groups, or require custom programming to provide the features the research groups require, thus forcing all collaborators to work on the same operating system 

or restrict data entry and management to just a few team members who have purchased licenses. Similarly, 

open -source tools for building collaborat ive data entry systems present their own challenges (Trujillo et al 

2022). While these systems are flexible and customizable, they often require extensive custom programming, 

and IT expertise for server deployment and maintenance (Yadav 2024). In our experience, building bespoke 

collaborative data entry systems in past projects ( Mota -Sanchez et al 2002, Turner et al 2018) has revealed 

the complexities involved in managing these tailored solutions. Relying on custom -built systems requires 

domain experts to communicate their needs to programmers through a lengthy, iterative developm ent 

process. This dependency removes control from the researchers, whose core expertise lies in their scientific 

domain rather than software development, preventing them from directly designing and modifying the data 

structures they need and ultimately del aying the project and stifling progress (Trujillo et al 2022). Given these 

challenges, we need an efficient and accessible framework to streamline collaborative data entry and ensure 

seamless validation across studies. 

To tackle these challenges, we developed an end -to -end open source workflow, called collaboratoR ,

using readily available open and domain -agnostic tools that can be applied across various fields. Our system, 

built upon a foundation of existing components widely used in science, is an automated data validation and 

processing workflow to feasibly custo mize for collaborative data entry without relying on programming or 

systems administration. For instance, Yenni et al (2019) developed a systematic framework for managing 

regularly updated ecological data, incorporating GitHub mediated Quality Assurance/Qu ality Control (QA/QC), 

and implemented that approach to a near -term dynamic forecasting dataset (White et al 2019). Kim et al 

(2022) further modified these frameworks by implementing a Continuous Integration (CI) pipeline for both data 

management and minim izing errors during data collection by field technicians with real -time feedback. This 

process relies on manually exporting the data which automatically triggers an extensive QA/QC workflow 

based on automated tools from Github. However, these workflows wer e designed for primarily field -collected 

data, require substantial technical infrastructure to deploy, and do not address the collaborative data needs 

of synthesis research, like meta -analysis. Our collaboratoR workflow fills these needs by providing a workflow 

and automation for processing data in CSV format, while still leveraging easy access Google Sheets and 

Github APIs for low -cost, user -friendly data entry that researchers can customize without IT expertise . We 

chose Google Sheets as a service for collaborative data entry for its familiarity, simplicity and availability of 

automation libraries for the R language From there, data can be automatically exported, validated, and 

aggregated into CSV files. Importa ntly, our workflow also preserves multiple tabs during conversion. Prior 

work has focused on field -collected data (White et al 2019, Kim et al 2022), but we extend this approach to 

broader data -analysis (e.g, meta -analyses), demonstrating a scalable and fl exible workflow relevant to 

ecology and beyond. By systematizing previously ad -hoc and often error -prone processes, our approach 

provides a flexible, reproducible framework that makes collaborative data entry and validation more 

transparent and less cumber some. In this way, collaboratoR complements existing CI -based pipelines, 

providing a practical stepping -stone for teams that may not have access to specialized infrastructure, while 

leveraging readily accessible platforms (e.g., Google Sheets APIs) to ensure consistency, traceability, a nd 

harmonization across studies. 

Here, we introduce and demonstrate the collaboratoR workflow by applying it to two case studies: a 

plant competition database and an avian interaction database. These examples highlight the versatility and 

effectiveness of the workflow in managing and validating large datasets while ensuring data integrity and 

transparency. The result is a documented process and software package that is easy to deploy, accessible to 

researchers with modest technical skills, and flexible enough to be adapted to different project requirements. 

This scalable framework can be ap plied across disciplines, from social sciences and ecology to 

pharmaceuticals, where data -synthesis play a critical role in data -driven decision -making and in the 

understanding of broad patterns. Ultimately, the goal of the collaboratoR is to set a new benchmark for 

efficient, transparent, and reproducible collaborative data management, minimizing "smudges" and enhancing 

research synthesis across fields and industries alike. Method & Results: Below we provide an overview of the collaboratoR framework, and describe a workflow 

that enables collaborative data entry, tracks changes, and transforms data into CSV files. 

1. The Framework 

The collaboratoR workflow provides a structured, accessible framework for collaborative data entry, 

validation, and aggregation across diverse research contexts. The workflow operates through our 

collaboratoR package, integrating multiple functional layers: (1) data retrieval from Google Drive via the gargle 

package (Bryan J, Citro C, Wickham H, 2026); (2) validation using a slightly modified Validate package (van 

der Loo & de Jonge 2021); and (3) conversion of validated entries into CSV files, which are then "committed" 

via git for reproducible version control. R was chosen for this integration due to its extensive use and familiarity 

across natural, medical, and social science disciplines. First, for data structure design and entry, we selected 

Google Sheets, a widely used, researcher -friendly platform, to collaboratively define both the data structure 

and format requirements. Entry in Google Sheets a lso allowed us to use "guard rails" around data entry (e.g., 

enter numeric values in a numeric column) that speeds up the data cleaning. Second, to automate data 

validation and aggregation, we modified the validate package (van der Loo & de Jonge 2021), which facilitates 

collaborative data entry, tracks changes using git version control, and converts data into CSV files. Data entry 

occurs in Google Sheets within a shared cloud folder. Each file is validated to ensure it meets predefined rules 

before being pushed to GitHub for version control. Finally, after data entry, files are pulled, validated again, 

and pushed to GitHub once verified. This ensures consistency and transparency throughout the data 

management process . Additionally, the workflow follows the Environmental Data Initiative (EDI) guidelines 

and adheres to FAIR data principles, incorporating harmonization at multiple levels to ensure standardized, 

reproducible data management across diverse disciplines. 

1.1 EDI framework integration 

The collaboratoR framework is designed to support a common data structure that aligns with the 

Environmental Data Initiative (EDI) framework (Gries et al 2023; https://edirepository.org/ ). This data structure 

is best understood in three levels, Level 0 (L0): raw data entry, Level (L1): cleaned data, and Level 2 (L2): 

analysis -ready data. L0 involves iterative refinement when issues arise, L1 focuses on data validation and 

cleaning, and L2 corresponds to the final analysis and synthesis phase. In accordance, these steps include: 

1. Set the study goals to guide data selection and identify the sources. 

2. Design the protocol for data collection from the sources based on the study goals and framework (e.g., 

PRISMA, O’Dea et al 2021). 

3. Design the data structures (metadata) required by the protocol, ensuring they align with the goals and 

data sources. 

4. Design the entry system for collecting data based on the design structures. 

5. Collect data following the protocol and data entry system. If issues arise with the data source, modify 

previous steps (L0). 

6. Validate the collected data and clean it to a form amenable to analysis (L1). 

7. Preliminary analysis of the initial data to confirm the design of goals, collection protocol, and data 

structures. If necessary, return to steps 3 and 4 and adjust the data structures and entry system. 

8. Analysis and summary of collected data (L2). 

Our system was created to give domain experts the ability to quickly adjust steps 2 -4 with feedback 

from 5, and to streamline step 6 while providing the added benefit of tracking data provenance, without 

requiring engineering and deploying complex data tec hnology. 

1.2 Version Control of research data with git Managing changes to data is crucial for teams practicing collaborative, open science. Locally stored 

spreadsheets like CSVs or Excel sheets or Airtables do not offer built -in tracking features. Although online 

spreadsheet software provides some version rev iew functionality, this can be lost when files are transferred 

or copied across different accounts. To overcome these challenges, we use git ( https://github.com/git/git ), the 

de facto standard for version control, allowing for seamless tracking of changes during collaborative code 

editing. The git version control system operates on files that are text -based formats, invented to track changes 

in source code but also applicable to data f iles. The CSV text -based format is ubiquitous for tabular data and 

works well with git for version control. If data editors use the standard git 'commit' process as data in a CSV 

file is added, edited, or deleted, a 'commit message' is permanently attached to those changes in the git 

database, which is distributed among collaborators and published on a web -based git service such as Gitub. 

The git visualization of version differences (in command line and as presented on Github) highlights changes 

made to tex t files, and changes to CSV files are indicated by row changes. This not only provides transparency 

for open science, but it also allows one to roll back data files to a previous state if need be. 

1.3 Why not use a Relational Database Management System? 

Relational database management systems (RDBMS) are often used in collaborative research projects 

to store and manage datasets (for example Yenni et al 2019, Turner et al 2018, Payumo et al 2024, 

Southworth et al 2026). However the technology requirements f or using RDBMS can be a barrier for some 

users, especially in projects in exploratory stages where data elements are being decided up frequently. An 

RDBMS requires setup and maintenance of a database and administration of a RDMS injects unneeded 

complexity that requires technical expertise and time that may not be available in a small team of researchers. 

In addition, RDBMSs require a custom -made user interface for researchers to efficiently enter data which 

requires software development and deployment to a shared server or cloud environment which, again, 

requires software development expertise and time to build these solutions that may not be available in the 

project team. 

The workflow we present here allows for some essential database capabilities such as structured data 

storage, data integrity (through validation), and relational linkage between tables (such as the list of columns, 

units of measure, validation rules, suppo rt tables like lists of species). However our workflow gives 

collaborators the ability to quickly adjust the data model by altering the spreadsheet structure and sharing 

those changes without requiring database administration or custom software development . Frequent low -

friction tuning of the data model is crucial in early stages of a data -synthesis. 

2. The collaboratoR workflow 

2.1 Overview 

Having outlined the guiding framework and supporting tools, we next detail the implementation of the 

collaboratoR workflow . The collaboratoR workflow, implemented by our collaboratoR package, hinges on the 

configuration and integration of three accessible, free, software platforms: the open -source software R, Cloud 

(e.g., Google Workspace a.k.a. Google Drive), and version control (GitHub) environments. Based on study 

goals and protoco l, the domain experts first define the necessary data fields, including validation rules and 

units, and create Data Entry Spreadsheets that adhere to the collaboratoR workflows’ formatting requirements 

(described below in Section 2.2). Alongside this, a validation rules file is set up within the R environment to 

manage more complex rules that match the data definitions. Once the initial setup is complete, domain expert s

enter preliminary data into the Data Entry Sheets, making adjustments to the fields and rules as necessary. 

The validate package (van der Loo & de Jonge 2021) then reads the Data Entry Schema, validation rules, 

and Data Entry Sheets to validate the data. If the data passes validation, it is converted to text format and 

committed to a version control system, such as git. The operator then uploads the latest validated version of 

this L0 data to a shared repository in GitHub. This workflow effectively bridges the gap between cloud services 

and version control systems, combining the user -friendly nature of cloud -based spreadsheet s with the text -

based, code -oriented version control of git, typically CSV data formats. 2.2 Workspace configuration 

2.2.1 Metadata preparation using common spreadsheet software 

Data Entry Schema : The Data Entry Schema is a Google Sheet that defines the structure of the 

database. It contains a vertical list of all column names (i.e., fields in the database), along with their data 

types, descriptions, units, and validation constraints (see Table 1 for required columns). The Data Entry 

Schema serves as the authoritative reference for what columns are permitted and how they should be 

formatted. The collaboratoR package reads this sheet and uses it to validate all incoming data. Any changes 

to column n ames or data types must be made in the Data Entry Schema first; all other sheets must conform 

to the structure it specifies. 

Data Entry Sheet : A Data Entry Sheet is a Google Sheet where collaborators enter raw data. During 

the study design phase, researchers create these sheets with column names in the first row that match the 

fields listed in the Data Entry Schema. Column names should be clear a nd free of special characters that may 

conflict with downstream software (see Bååth 2012 for best practices for R variable naming conventions). 

Data Entry Sheets should be separated based on natural groupings amenable to data entry. For example, a 

multi -sp ecies trait database may have one Data Entry Sheet per species, or a meta -analysis may have one 

Data Entry Sheet per reference paper being analyzed. Within a single Data Entry Sheet, multiple tabs may 

be used to organize different categories of information (see Case Study I in Section 3 for an illustration). Data 

Entry Sheets may also use built -in Google Sheets data quality features, such as drop -down menus, to limit 

entries to predefined options and reduce inconsistencies. For instance, to record geolocati on, latitude and 

longitude columns can be constrained to accept only numeric values in decimal degrees, preventing 

inconsistencies in format, capitalization, or units. Multiple, related Data Entry Schemas may be used when a 

project requires different data structures across its Data Entry Sheets. 

Master URL : The Master URL is a Google Sheet that lists all Data Entry Sheets to be included in the 

validation process. It must contain at least two columns: one for the URL of each Data Entry Sheet, and one 

for a unique identifier (ID) for the grouping that the Data Entry Sheet covers. These column names are flexible 

and are specified when running the R code (e.g., id_column and url_column). The Master URL allows the 

collaboratoR package to programmatically locate and retrieve all Data Entry Sheets for a given project .

Dictionary : A Dictionary is an optional Google Sheet that enumerates the valid entries for a categorical 

field and stores associated metadata. For example, a project with a "species" column may maintain a species 

Dictionary listing each species alongside its common n ame, Latin name, and lifespan. Storing this information 

in a separate Dictionary rather than repeating it in every Data Entry Sheet reduces redundancy, minimizes 

the risk of spelling errors, and keeps Data Entry Sheets concise. Dictionaries are created and edited in Google 

Sheets by domain experts. The collaboratoR package reads them in and uses them during validation to check 

that categorical entries match the approved set of values. 

Together, the Data Entry Schema, Data Entry Sheets, Master URL, and Dictionaries provide the metadata 

foundation from which the collaboratoR package automatically constructs a validated, uniform database. Table 1. Required columns in the Data Entry Schema read by the collaboratoR package 

2.2.2 Google Workspace API Configuration (popularly Google Drive) 

Google Workspace comprises several tools, including Google docs, sheets, cloud, etc. As it was 

previously known as Google Drive, and that name remains widely recognized, we will refer to it as Google 

Drive henceforth. To enable spreadsheet usage, the workf low relies on the Google Sheets package (Bryan J, 

2025) which leverages the gargle package (Bryan J, Citro C, Wickham H, 2026) to access and download data 

from Google Drive. If the google sheets are private or protected within an institutional account, this requires a 

Google Cloud project with the Google Sheets API enabled, following th e instructions from the Google Drive 

developer documentation. Once the Google Cloud account and project are created, one will need to enable 

APIs and download credential files ( see gargle documentation for details). However, for those practicing open 

science and entering data into publicly accessible spreadsheets that anyone can view via a shared link, a 

separate cloud project becomes unnecessary. This workflow simply requires R code to be read from Google 

Sheets with read -only access, ensuring accurate and transparent data handling. 

2.2.3 Git 

The workflow requires the 'git' software to be installed on the computer on which the L0 data will be 

validated. While many operating systems come with git (e.g., MacOS), collaboration requires a central git 

server or web -based git service. We used GitHub for this workflow ( https://github.com ) as it is a free and 

widely adopted and user -friendly platform. The following steps outline the process: First, make sure that all 

collaborators who may be using data have a GitHub account (or on the git service of your choice). Second, 

create a new repos itory in GitHub to hold CSV data files, which can be either public or private. Ensure that all 

collaborators who will validate and analyze the data have read and write access. Third, each collaborator 

should use the standard git process to 'clone' the repo sitory to their working computer in preparation for 

receiving the validated CSV files. Finally, if the data entry and management are handled separately from the 

analysis or if multiple analyses are being conducted on the same data set, consider creating tw o repositories: 

a primary repository for the entered data (L0 in the EDI framework), and another for pulling these data and 

managing analysis code. We recommend separating repositories for data validation (L0) and for data 

wrangling and analysis (L1 and L2) to help maintain a clear division of tasks. This structure allows for 

modularity and maintainability of the data pipeline, particularly when handling data from multiple sources, 

though smaller teams may not require this separation. 2.2.4 R package/collaboratoR configuration 

Besides git software, the R system is required for this workflow. To begin, download our current code 

(collaboratoR.Rmd ) from the GitHub repository (URL) as an example to start with, and copy it to a new 

repository of your own on your computer. While the package website provides detailed instructions for 

configuration, at a minimum, variables are required to store the Mast er URLs for the Data Entry Shema 

(template), the Master URL listing all Data Entry Sheets with their ID value, and one example Google Sheet 

containing dummy data for testing, and, for convenience, the email address of the user to access Google 

Drive. If pr ivate Google Sheets are used, details from the Google Cloud project, including the Drive API key, 

must also be stored. 

2.2.5 Validation Rules 

For data validation, this workflow relies on the validate package (van der Loo & de Jonge 2021). The 

validate package can read validation rules from a specially formatted file (in YAML format, see package 

documentation). To create additional validation checks beyond field presence and data type, create a 

validation file for each type of Data Entry Sheet that foll ows the Data Entry Schema. Here, we customize the 

validate package for the needs of our datasets. For example, numerical fields can be checked for range or 

categorical fields to match a controlled vocabulary, and factors can be validated against a list of possibilities 

(e.g., non -negative biomass, valid country n ames). 

2.3 collaboratoR workflow 

With all necessary setup completed, the workflow is now functional. The following steps describe the process 

(Figure 1): 

1. Select an item or unit of work based on the study requirement. This is the main unit of work, and each 

unit/item will have its own Google Sheets file. Determine the unique identification value for this unit of 

work, depending upon the protocol for naming i ndividual Google Sheets. This could be an ID created 

by the researcher, or a data field such as "species" but must be unique within this project. 

2. Create a new, empty Google Sheet for this unit of work by copying the Data Entry Schema template 

as described above. This Data Entry Sheet must include columns listed in the Data Entry Schema. 

Name the sheet for the unique ID and add the URL of this Data E ntry Sheet to the Master URL, along 

with the value of the ID. 

3. Enter data for this unit following the protocol in the Data Entry Sheet. 

4. As the protocol evolves based on issues discovered during data entry, update the Data Entry Schema 

and the Data Entry Sheets. 

5. Periodically, collaborators open the collaboratoR package with the configuration for the study, and run 

the process to update auxiliary metadata if necessary. Then, they run the validation process (e.g., see 

case studies described below in Section 3) to generate CSVs into the folder containing the L0 dat a

files. This may be done each time a Google Sheet containing data is updated, or for multiple sheets. 

It is recommended that this process is done regularly. 

6. Record the changes to the data using git: the changes to the L0 folder should be saved using the git 

'commit' process, adding a message describing what was changed. The collaborator may commit one 

file at a time, several or all data files at once. Using th e commit process for each file changed allows 

collaborators to write message indicating exactly why the changes were made ('new sheet for group 

G, or 'fixed typo in value A for ID X') 

7. Push these data changes to L0 data in the shared data repository. 

8. Collaborators can inspect data changes via the git web service, or by pulling the changes and using 

the git 'log' and 'diff' functionality. This workflow ensures data is processed in stages, with clear steps for validation, transformation, and 

documentation (provenance), leading to harmonized and reusable datasets for research purposes. 

Figure 1 : The collaboratoR workflow, an open -source, end -to -end solution, facilitates collaborative data entry 

using Google Sheets and version control through GitHub. The collaboratoR package automates data 

validation and aggregation, ensuring data consistency and transparency. Data are entered into shared Google Sheets, validated, and pushed to GitHub for version control. After verification, the data undergo revalidation 

to ensure accuracy before finalization. Created in © Canva 

Section 3: Applying the collaboratoR workflow to case studies 

In this section, we highlight the successful implementation of the collaboratoR workflow through two 

collaborative research case studies: a plant competition meta -analysis involving 7 collaborators (Petri, 

Ramesh et al., 2025) and an avian interaction dataset involving 17 collaborators ( Zarnetske et al 2026a, 

Zarnetske et al 2026b ). These examples emphasize the workflow’s ability to manage large datasets 

collaboratively, validate data effectively, and ensure both data integrity and transparency. 

3.1 A plant competition meta -analysis: Here, we employed the collaboratoR workflow to generate a plant 

competition database which was subsequently used for synthesis and meta -analysis (Ramesh et al 2024). A 

team of four researchers scanned >3,500 papers on species competition across nutrient levels. Of these, 67 

papers met our criteria, with which we constructed a comprehensive database with numerous qualitative and 

quantitative variables to detail competition outcomes at the species level (Petri, Ramesh et al 2025). Data 

from each of the 67 studies was entered into Google Sheet s, which allowed for organizing different types of 

information into separate tabs, improving data organization and reducing redundancy. For instance, we 

isolated biotic data, which contained multiple rows of biomass data from each species, in one tab, whil e

environmental data was stored in a separate tab. This approach helped us avoid repeating environmental 

data for each new study, resulting in a cleaner, more efficient data structure. Once the data were entered, the 

links to the files were stored in the M aster URL, allowing easy integration with R for subsequent analysis. 

For validation, we specifically configured the Google Sheet to enforce a set of rules. For instance, 

ensuring species and country names were formatted as characters; biomass and variance data were non -

negative and numeric; and latitude and longitude values fell within predefined ranges. This early validation 

process flagged critical missing values, preventing errors from progressing downstream. To maintain 

oversight, we used version control via GitHub, which allowed us to track changes and identify contribu tors at 

each stage. After the bulk of data extraction, we identified the need for collecting information from each 

species, such as growth forms, life history data, and provenance. However, adding this data to the original 

Data Entry Sheets at this point w ould have been both tedious and disruptive, as it would have necessitated 

changes to the existing columns across multiple Google Sheets. Instead, we developed a separate file, 

“species dictionary”, which could be linked to the species names within the stud ies, ensuring greater 

consistency without disrupting the existing structure. After the dataset underwent validation, we exported it to 

CSV files and combined the individual datasets into a cohesive database. In conventional approaches, dealing 

with one or two problematic files often led to challenges in identifying the root cause. Here, the validation of 

each dataset independently made it easy to pinpoint and resolve issues. Only validated files were incorporated 

into the database, preserving data quality. As a result, we could still write preliminary code and proceed with 

analysis on the validated data, even if certain datasets failed validation, until everything was fully organized 

and ready for final processing. By linking these steps, we established a ro bust framework to construct our 

database while maintaining data integrity and flexibility, and subsequently used it in a global meta -analysis 

(Petri, Ramesh et al 2025). 

3.2 An avian interaction dataset: The AvianMetaNetwork is an open -access dataset consisting of more than 

25,000 pairwise bird -bird interactions, for 731 focal bird taxa occurring in the continental United States, Alaska, 

and Canada during breeding and non -breeding seasons, and 1,258 additi onal bird taxa that they interact with 

(Zarnetske et al 2026a, Zarnetske et al 2026b ). Biotic interactions, such as competition, predator -prey, brood 

parasitism, cavity nest creation, mixed flocking, and kleptoparasitism were derived from gray literature and 

peer -reviewed articles. Information was manually entered into a Google Sheet by d ata recorders following a 

strict protocol ( Zarnetske et al 2026a ). CSV files were downloaded from Google Sheets, entered into GitHub, 

and verified by a second data recorder prior to entering into the data cleaning workflow. The data cleaning workflow includes further error correction and data verification and harmonization steps to remove typos, 

update taxonomy, remove duplicates, and ensure intercompatibility of records. Once through the cleaning 

process, the AvianMetaNetwork consists of an e dge list of these interactions, with all records including the 

citation of the reference and the text excerpt from the reference describing the interaction. This workflow uses 

Google Drive and git as described above to allow ease of data entry and to track and attribute all data 

modifications to the user who made them. A major goal of this data collection effort is to align with open 

science FAIR data principles (Wilkinson et al. 2016). 

Future direction and conclusion: 

Our collaboratoR workflow offers numerous opportunities for expansion to improve its functionality and 

adaptability for a wider range of users and institutions. First , our workflow requires all Data Entry Sheets to 

conform to the Data Entry Schema, but inconsistencies could arise when collaborators alter the Data Entry 

Sheets inadvertently. A future enhancement could be to implement stricter validation mechanisms that prevent 

such changes, ensuring the integrity of the data entry process while retaining flexibility. For instance, building 

on Kim et al. (2022), the workflow could also be extended into a full Continuous Integration (CI) pipeline that 

automatically runs QA /QC on each update and provides immediate feedback to contributors. Second , the use 

of Google Drive (Cloud) for private (non -open) data entry sheets requires significant setup for many institutions 

for access by program code. Other enterprise spreadsheets have similar complex requirements (e.g., 

Microsoft Office). Identifying an alternative data entry system that is nearly as user -friendly and collaborative 

as commercial spreadsheet services but is easier to use could be a shared community goal. This could involve 

creating a local file editor that works with CSVs and maintains th eir structure, and relying strictly on Git/GitHub 

for data sharing. Third , although the validation tool is comprehensive, it is code -oriented. The file format 

(YAML), while manageable, may not be intuitive for domain experts. One direction for improvement would be 

to create an easier -to -use syntax for basic validation rules, al lowing domain experts to define and manage 

validation directly within the spreadsheet. Finally , the current workflow uses GitHub, and in the future can be 

expanded to use other service control platforms such as GitLab (https://gitlab.com ) or BitBucket 

(https://bitbucket.org ). These services provide additional functionalities such as integrated Continuous 

Integration and Deployment (CI/CD) workflows, advanced collaboration features, and enhanced project 

management, offering valuable options for improving the workflow and adap ting it to different institutional 

needs. One caveat is that Git/GitHub can become impractical for very large datasets because tracking many 

versions inflates repository size; our use case focuses on moderately sized, modular data (e.g., one sheet 

per stud y), but other settings may require alternative storage/versioning strategies. Expanding the 

collaboratoR workflow along these lines will not only improve its functionality but also increase its accessibility 

and efficiency for a broader user base. 

Conclusion 

Successful data synthesis and coordinated field and experiment studies often require collaborative 

data collection and entry, yet many domain experts lack the engineering and IT skills to effectively use 

enterprise or custom -made platforms to build a data base. Moreover, making interactive changes to data entry 

protocols typically requires time -consuming modifications to the system, which often involves IT support. This 

reliance on external expertise limits the ability of domain experts to adapt their syste ms quickly as they 

uncover new insights from the data. To address this challenge, the collaboratoR workflow provides a scalable 

and user -friendly solution for collaborative data entry and validation. By leveraging tools like Google Sheets 

and GitHub, collaboratoR empowers domain experts to take full control of their data management, 

streamlining the process while maintaining data integrity and transparency. Implemented in two case 

studies —one focused on plant competition and another on an avian database —the workfl ow has proven 

effective in managing and validating large datasets that are typically used for a meta -analysis, demonstrating 

its versatility across disciplines. The impact of collaboratoR extends broadly in academic research, offering 

applications in fields of social sciences, medicine, and ecology, where data synthesis is a critical tool for 

addressing important research questions. This workflow also holds promise for industries that rely on 

collaborative methods for data analysis, such as pharmaceuticals and clinical research. By establishing a new benchmark for collaborative data management, collaboratoR enhances the efficiency, accuracy, and 

reproducibility of research synthesis. It opens up new possibilities for researchers to control and adapt their 

data systems in real -time, ultimately driving more effective and data -driven discoveries across a range of 

fields. 

############################################################################## 

Author Contributions 

Conceptualization: PB (lead), AR, PLZ 

Data curation: PB 

Investigation: PB 

Formal analysis: PB 

Methodology: PB 

Validation: PB (lead), LP 

Visualization: AR 

Writing —original draft: PB (equal), AR (equal) 

Writing —review and editing: PB, AR, PLZ, AMB, LP, KK, ADT 

Supervision: PLZ 

Project administration: PLZ 

Competing Interests Authors : The authors declare that no competing interests exist. 

Code availability: https://github.com/IBEEM -MSU/CollaboratoR 

Funding statement: This study was funded by The Institute for Biodiversity, Ecology, Evolution, and 

Macrosystems (IBEEM) ( https://ibeem.msu.edu/ ) at Michigan State University (PB, AR, LP, AMB, ADT, KK, 

PLZ), through a Michigan State University Strategic Partnership Grant ; PB was also supported by Institute for 

Cyber -Enabled Research (ICER) and a MSU Ecology, Evolution, and Behavior (EEB) Program Seed Grant 

(to PLZ); AR was also supported by a MSU EEB Presidential Postdoctoral Fellowship. 

Ethics : The research in this study did not require an ethics review due to the exclusive use of publicly available 

data and the absence of involvement with human subjects. 

Acknowledgements: We thank the Environment Data Initiative for ecological data management vision and 

guidance, numerous MSU undergraduates instrumental in creating the data and testing the git -based 

AvianMetaNetwork workflow foundational for this project, the MSU EEB progr am for supporting this work for 

providing physical space and financially, and Institute for Cyber Support f or supporting PB's involvement in 

this project. We want to thank the authors of the R "Validate" package for their freely available code and 

extensive documentation. Google Workspace and Cloud resources and support provided by MSU IT Services 

Research Cybe rinfrastructure. 

Reference 

Allen, I. E., & Olkin, I. (1999). Estimating time to conduct a meta -analysis from number of citations retrieved. 

Jama, 282(7), 634 -635. 

Bååth, R. (2012). The state of naming conventions in R. 

https://digitalcommons.unl.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1349&context=r -journal 

Berlin, J. A., Crowe, B. J., Xia, H. A., & Evans, S. J. (2019). The use of metaanalysis in 

pharmacoepidemiology. pharmacoepidemiology, 897 -947. Borer, E. T., Seabloom, E. W., Jones, M. B., & Schildhauer, M. (2009). Some simple guidelines for effective 

data management. Bulletin of the Ecological Society of America, 90(2), 205 -214. 

Borer, E. T., Harpole, W. S., Adler, P. B., Lind, E. M., Orrock, J. L., Seabloom, E. W., & Smith, M. D. (2014). 

Finding generality in ecology: a model for globally distributed experiments. Methods in Ecology and 

Evolution , 5(1), 65 -73. 

Bryan J (2025). googlesheets4: Access Google Sheets using the Sheets API V4. 

https://googlesheets4.tidyverse.org 

Bryan J, Citro C, Wickham H (2026). gargle: Utilities for Working with Google APIs. R package version 

1.6.1, https://gargle.r -lib.org. 

Burchinal, M., & Neebe, E. (2006). Best practices in quantitative methods for developmentalists: I. Data 

management: Recommended practices. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development. 

Collins, F. S., Morgan, M., & Patrinos, A. (2003). The Human Genome Project: lessons from large -scale 

biology. Science , 300 (5617), 286 -290. 

Fowler, D., Barratt, J., & Walsh, P. (2017). Frictionless data: making research data quality visible. 

International Journal of Digital Curation, 12(2), 274 -285. 

Gries, C., Hanson, P. C., O'Brien, M., Servilla, M., Vanderbilt, K., & Waide, R. (2023). The environmental 

data Initiative: Connecting the past to the future through data reuse. Ecology and Evolution, 13(1), e9592. 

Gurevitch, J., Koricheva, J., Nakagawa, S., & Stewart, G. (2018). Meta -analysis and the science of research 

synthesis. Nature, 555(7695), 175 -182. 

Hu, W., Yan, G., Zhang, J., Chen, Z., Qian, Q., & Wu, S. (2025). Analysis of scientific paper retractions due 

to data problems: Revealing challenges and countermeasures in data management. Accountability in 

Research , 1 -31. 

Kim, A. Y., Herrmann, V., Barreto, R., Calkins, B., Gonzalez -Akre, E., Johnson, D. J., ... & Anderson -

Teixeira, K. J. (2022). Implementing GitHub actions continuous integration to reduce error rates in ecological 

data collection. Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 13(11), 2572 -2585. 

Koesten, L., Kacprzak, E., Tennison, J., & Simperl, E. (2019). Collaborative practices with structured data: 

Do tools support what users need? Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in 

Computing Systems, 1 -14. https://doi.org/10.1145/32906 05.3300330 

Lakens, D., Hilgard, J., & Staaks, J. (2016). On the reproducibility of meta -analyses: Six practical 

recommendations. BMC psychology, 4(1), 24. 

Lane, P. W., Higgins, J. P., Anagnostelis, B., Anzures -Cabrera, J., Baker, N. F., Cappelleri, J. C., ... & 

Whitehead, A. (2013). Methodological quality of meta -analyses: matched -pairs comparison over time and 

between industry -sponsored and academic -sponsored reports. Research Synthesis Methods, 4(4), 342 -350. 

Marx, V. (2013). The big challenges of big data. Nature, 498(7453), 255 -260. 

Michelle, L. B., Howard, G., & Levine -Finley, S. (2010). Collaboration and Team Science: A Field Guide. 

Bethesda, USA: National Institute of Health. Mota -Sanchez, D., Bills, P. S., & Whalon, M. E. (2002). Arthropod resistance to pesticides: Status and 

overview. In W. B. Wheeler (Ed.), Pesticides in agriculture and the environment (1st ed., pp. 241 –272). CRC 

Press. https://doi.org/10.1201/9780203909430 

National Academies of Sciences, E., and Medicine. 2025. A Vision for Continental -Scale Biology: Research 

Across Multiple Scales. The National Academies Press, Washington, DC. DOI: 10.17226/27285 

R. E. O’Dea, et al., Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta -analyses in ecology and 

evolutionary biology: a PRISMA extension. Biological Reviews 96, 1695 –1722 (2021). 

Payumo, J., Bello -Bravo, J., Chennuru, V., Mercene, S. A., Yim, C., Duynslager, L., Kanamarlapudi, B., 

Posos -Parra, O., Payumo, S., & Mota -Sanchez, D. (2024). An Assessment Model for Agricultural 

Databases: The Arthropod Pesticide Resistance Database as a Case Study. Insects, 15(10), 747. 

https://doi.org/10.3390/insects15100747 

Petri, L., Ramesh, A., Martínez -Blancas, A., Deep Tiwari, A., Bills, P. S., Sullivan, L. L., & Zarnetske, P. L. 

(2025). Nutrient enrichment intensifies plant competitive effects, favouring monocultures: a global meta -

analysis. bioRxiv , 2025 -09. https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.26.678566 

Ramesh, A., Martínez -Blancas, A., Petri, L., Tiwari, A., Bills, P., & Zarnetske, P. L. (2024). Global 

quantification of species competitive ability along resource gradients. Open Science Framework. 

https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/BG8V7 

Schimel, D., Hargrove, W., Hoffman, F., & MacMahon, J. (2007). NEON: A hierarchically designed national 

ecological network. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment , 5(2), 59 -59. 

Southworth, C.A., Winans, J.C., Gordon, J.B. et al. Demographic, behavioral, and ecological data from a 

long -term field study of wild baboons in Amboseli, Kenya. Sci Data 13, 311 (2026). 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597 -026 -06741 -2

Stokols, D., Hall, K. L., Taylor, B. K., and Moser, R. P. (2008). The science of team science: overview of the 

field and introduction to the supplement. Am. J. Prevent. Med. 35, S77 –S89. 

Torka, A. K., Mazei, J., & Hüffmeier, J. (2021). Together, everyone achieves more —or, less? An 

interdisciplinary meta -analysis on effort gains and losses in teams. Psychological Bulletin, 147(5), 504. 

Trujillo, M. Z., Hébert -Dufresne, L., & Bagrow, J. (2022). The penumbra of ce: projects outside of 

centralized platforms are longer maintained, more academic and more collaborative. EPJ Data Science, 

11(1), 31. 

Turner, J. W., Bills, P. S., & Holekamp, K. E. (2018). Ontogenetic change in determinants of social network 

position in the spotted hyena. Behavioral ecology and sociobiology , 72 (1), 10. 

van der Loo, M. P. J., & de Jonge, E. (2021). Data Validation Infrastructure for R. Journal of Statistical 

Software, 97(10), 1 –31. https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v097.i10 

White, E. P., Yenni, G. M., Taylor, S. D., Christensen, E. M., Bledsoe, E. K., Simonis, J. L., & Ernest, S. M. 

(2019). Developing an automated iterative near -term forecasting system for an ecological study. Methods in 

Ecology and Evolution, 10(3), 332 -344. 

Wilkinson, M. D., Dumontier, M., Aalbersberg , I. J., Appleton, G., Axton, M., Baak, A., ... & Mons, B. (2016). 

The FAIR Guiding Principles for scientific data management and stewardship. Scientific data, 3(1), 1 -9. Winowiecki, L., Smukler, S., Shirley, K., Remans, R., Peltier, G., Lothes, E., ... & Alkema, L. (2011). Tools 

for enhancing interdisciplinary communication. Sustainability: Science, practice and policy, 7(1), 74 -80. 

Wuchty, S., Jones, B. F., & Uzzi, B. (2007). The increasing dominance of teams in production of knowledge. 

Science, 316(5827), 1036 -1039. 

Yadav, S. (2024). Challenges and Concerns in the Utilization of Meta -Analysis Software: Navigating the 

Landscape of Scientific Synthesis. Cureus, 16(1). 

Yenni, G. M., Christensen, E. M., Bledsoe, E. K., Supp, S. R., Diaz, R. M., White, E. P., & Ernest, S. M. 

(2019). Developing a modern data workflow for regularly updated data. PLoS Biology, 17(1), e3000125. 

Zarnetske, P. L., P. Bills, K. Kapsar, and L. Mansfield. 2026a. AvianMetaNetwork for North America. 

https://github.com/AvianMetaNetwork/AvianMetaNetwork .

Zarnetske, P.L., P. Bills, K. Kapsar, L. Mansfield, and E. Parker. 2026b. The AvianMetaNetwork: biotic 

interactions among birds of the continental United States and Canada ver 2. Environmental Data Initiative. 

https://doi.org/10.6073/pasta/9bc99f67618359b2d9a6770eff22664a (Accessed 2026 -05 -05)