Title: SmellBench: Towards Fine-Grained Evaluation of Code Agents on Refactoring Tasks

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.05574v1

Published Time: Fri, 05 Jun 2026 00:34:51 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
## SmellBench: Towards Fine-Grained Evaluation of Code Agents on Refactoring Tasks 

Fake Lin 1,2, Binbin Hu 2, Xi Zhu 3, Ziwei Zhao 1, Zhi Zheng 1

Ziqi Liu 2, Zhiqiang Zhang 2, Jun Zhou 2, Tong Xu 11University of Science and Technology of China 2Ant Group 3Rutgers Univerisity fklin@mail.ustc.edu.cn, bin.hbb@antfin.com, zhengzhi97@ustc.edu.cn   

> Code: https://github.com/MINE-USTC/SmellBench
> Data: https://huggingface.co/datasets/critical88/SmellBench

Abstract 

Code Agents have achieved remarkable ad-vances in recent years, exhibiting strong ca-pabilities across a wide range of software en-gineering tasks. However, their misuse of-ten produces bloated and disorganized code that impairing readability, extensibility, and robustness. Despite this risk, existing bench-marks largely evaluate functional correctness rather than long-term maintainability of code agents. In this paper, we propose SmellBench, an extensible code refactoring benchmark that proactively injects code smells into clean code snippets from real-world repositories. This design enables the generation of controlled, high-quality, and diverse refactoring cases with human-written ground truth. Specifically, it contains 294 cases spanning 7 popular smell types, 3 difficulty levels, 2 instruction settings across 7 real-world repositories. We further design 3 evaluation aspects covering functional correctness, localization ability, and refactoring quality assessment. Experiments with 2 popu-lar agents and 6 large langauge models (LLMs) show that the best combination—Qwen Code + Claude Sonnet 4.5—achieved only a 50.34 score of smell elimination. Further analysis reveals that this gap arises from a focus on local code smells and a lack of cross-file under-standing, which hinders comprehensive smell elimination. 

1 Introduction 

Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have sparked the development of powerful code agents capable of solving complex software engi-neering tasks, including code generation, bug fix-ing, and repository-level reasoning. (Wang et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2025, 2024; Aider, 2023). While bringing convenience to developers, many pro-gramming tasks have been delegated entirely to code agents without any human review. Such mis-use raises broad concerns about the generation of bloated and disorganized code, which severely im-pairing readability, extensibility, and robustness. However, existing benchmarks primarily focus on functional correctness, leaving the long-term main-tainability of code agents largely underexplored. (Jimenez et al., 2023; Merrill et al., 2026; Jain et al., 2024; Zan et al., 2025). Fortunately, code refac-toring has garnered increasing attention, where the task aims at improving existing code quality, en-hancing maintainability, and supporting the long-term evolution of software systems (Liu et al., 2025b; Gautam et al., 2025; Garg et al., 2025; Dinu et al., 2026). Existing refactoring benchmarks can be broadly divided into two lines. One line of research fo-cuses on curating refactoring-oriented benchmarks (Chen, 2021; Gautam et al., 2025; Jain et al., 2024; Tapader et al., 2025), which offer high-quality refactoring cases with clear instructions. However, the substantial human effort leads to unaffordable cost and limited scalability, which in turn restricts the coverage of diverse refactoring scenarios in real-world codebases. Another line of benchmark auto-matically mines refactoring cases from the commit histories of GitHub repositories(Xu et al., 2026; Pomian et al., 2024; Kovacic et al., 2025; Thillen et al., 2026). Although this approach offers bet-ter scalability, real-world refactoring cases are of-ten distributed across multiple commits and tightly intertwined with feature implementation and bug fixing. Consequently, refactoring signals in real repositories are sparse, fragmented, and unevenly distributed, making it difficult for commit-history-based benchmarks to systematically capture realis-tic refactoring scenarios. To address this limitation, we propose Smell-Bench , an extensible code refactoring benchmark that proactively injects code smells into clean code snippets from real-world repositories . This design supports the generation of controlled, high-quality, and diverse refactoring cases with human-written 

> arXiv:2606.05574v1 [cs.SE] 4 Jun 2026

ground truth. SmellBench contains 294 cases span-ning 7 smell types, 3 difficulty levels and two in-struction settings across 7 real-world repositories to ensure comprehensive evaluation of refactor ability of current code agents. Overall, our SmellBench offers the following advantages: (1) Purity . It isolates refactoring from other code changes. (2) 

Diversity . It covers 7 complex smell types. (3) Au-thenticity . It provides human-written ground truth. (4) Extensibility . It can be easily extended to other smell types or even task types by introducing new specifications. (5) Decontamination . It avoids data leakage as it only involves newly generated cases. We further design 3 evaluation aspects specifi-cally for refactoring tasks, including test passing rate to ensure functional correctness, localization accuracy to assess the identification of refactor-ing targets, and LLM-based judgment to evalu-ate the refactoring quality. Moreover, we conduct experiments on 2 open-source code agents and 6 representative LLMs. The results show that the best-performing configuration, Qwen Code with Claude Sonnet 4.5, achieves only 50.34 score of smell elimination, which represents that existing approaches mainly focus on local code smells and struggle to identify and address smells that propa-gate across multiple files. Meanwhile, most models pass over 80% test cases, suggesting that relying solely on functional correctness is insufficient to ef-fectively distinguish refactoring capabilities among code agents. This further highlights the necessity of introducing LLM-as-Judge for refactoring quality assessment. In summary, we highlight the main strengths of this work as follows: • We propose SmellBench , an extensible code refactoring benchmark that proactively injects code smells into clean code snippets, achiev-ing the trade-off between data scalability and quality in existing benchmarks. • SmellBench comprises 294 high-quality refac-toring cases spanning 7 complex smell types, 3 difficulty levels, and 2 instruction settings across 7 real-world repositories, with human-written ground truth for evaluation. • We design a 3-dimensional evaluation frame-work tailored for refactoring tasks, includ-ing test passing rate, localization accuracy, and LLM-based quality assessment, provid-ing more nuanced insights beyond functional correctness. • Extensive experiments with 2 open-source agents and 6 representative LLMs reveal that current approaches achieve only 50.34 score in smell elimination, struggling particularly with cross-file smell identification, which re-vealing significant room for improvement. 

2 Related Work 

2.1 Code Benchmark 

Benchmarking the coding capabilities of large lan-guage models has evolved with the increasing complexity of code generation tasks (Chen, 2021; Austin et al., 2021; Jimenez et al., 2023; Jain et al., 2024; Ni et al., 2025; Zhuo et al., 2024). Early benchmarks such as HumanEval (Chen, 2021) and MBPP (Austin et al., 2021) focus on isolated pro-gramming problems and measure the functional correctness of generated code at the function or al-gorithm level. Beyond standalone functions, Clas-sEval (Du et al., 2023) targets class-level code generation, and repository-oriented benchmarks including RepoBench (Liu et al., 2023) and Cross-CodeEval (Ding et al., 2023) extend the scope to cross-file and project-level code modeling, empha-sizing contextual reasoning in realistic codebases. Subsequently, research attention shifted toward real-world software engineering problems. SWE-bench (Jimenez et al., 2023) centers on bug fixing derived from real GitHub issues. LiveCodeBench (Jain et al., 2024) draws tasks from contests across three competitive programming platforms, placing greater demands on existing large language mod-els. More recently, task-oriented benchmarks have been proposed to assess code agents under realistic user demands. GitTaskBench (Ni et al., 2025) an-chors benchmarking in repository-based tasks, and CodeIF (Yan et al., 2025) characterizes instruction-following behavior across diverse code generation scenarios, shifting the paradigm toward user-driven, multi-step problem solving. However, these benchmarks focus mainly on code generation and bug fixing, but pay limited attention to refactoring tasks that are fundamental and critical to software maintenance and long-term evolution. 1 Feature Envy 

Function uses other class’s 

data more than its own.       

> class Report :
> def total (self ,order ):
> return order .customer .discount ()
> class Order :
> def customer (self ):
> . . .

God Classes 

Class does too many things.        

> class SystemManager :
> def user (self ): . . .
> def email (self ): . . .
> def report (self ): . . .
> def backup (self ): . . .
> def auth (self ): . . .
> def settings (self ): . . .

2 Data Clumps 

Groups of variables passed 

together.            

> def create_user (name ,email ,phone ,
> address ,city ,state ):
> user =User (name ,email ,phone ,
> address ,city ,state )
> save_user (user )

Shotgun Surgery 

Change requires modifying many 

different classes/files.       

> class OrderService :
> def calc_total (self ): . . .
> class InvoiceService :
> def calc_total (self ): . . .
> class ReportService :
> def calc_total (self ): . . .

Dead Code 

Code never executed or used.       

> def old_helper ():
> # This method is never called
> # Kept for no reason
> x= 1
> y= 2
> return x+y

Interface Segregation 

Interface is too large; classes are 

forced to depend on unused methods.           

> class Printer (ABC ):
> @abstractmethod
> def print (self ,order ): pass
> @abstractmethod
> def scan (self ,order ): pass
> @abstractmethod
> def fax (self ,order ): pass

7 Deep Inlining 

Sub -methods are inlined into 

itself, making it very complex.  

> def total_price (items ):
> . . .

5

3

6

4        

> # Many classes
> # just print
> . . . # Code of calc_price ()
> . . . # Code of apply_discount ()
> . . . # Code of apply _tax () Depth 3 inlining makes it exponentially harder to understand and refactor.
> total_price apply_discount apply_tax calc_price
> inlined inlined inlined

Figure 1: Definitions of the 7 code smell types with illustrative toy examples. click (42) 

> jinja (42)
> seaborn (42)
> pandas (42)
> scikit-learn (42)
> numpy (42)
> xarray (42)

(a) Distribution of dataset 

> FE (42)
> GC (42)
> DC (42)
> SS (42)
> DCE (42)
> IS (42)
> DI (42)

(b) Distribution of smell types 

Figure 2: Distribution of SmellBench across 7 python repositories and 7 smell types. 

2.2 Refactor Benchmark 

Alongside the rapid progress of code generation benchmarks, research on evaluating code refac-toring has gained increasing attention in recent years (Gautam et al., 2025; Xu et al., 2026; Liu et al., 2025b; Kuang Piao et al., 2025). Early work constructs refactoring datasets from a small number of projects, mostly in Java, and evaluates LLMs on identifying refactoring opportunities and applying corresponding code changes (Liu et al., 2025b; Tapader et al., 2025). These studies show that prompt design can significantly affect refac-toring performance, but their primary goal is to analyze LLM behavior instead of modeling real-istic refactoring workloads. Later efforts adopt more complex settings for refactoring, such as stateful refactoring across multiple steps (Gautam et al., 2025), extracting shared logic into reusable libraries (Kovacic et al., 2025), or combining LLM suggestions with IDE or static analysis tools (Po-mian et al., 2024). These directions emphasize broader code context and design-level reasoning. More recent benchmarks attempt to leverage real-world repositories by mining refactoring-related commits or covering a wider range of refactoring types (Kuang Piao et al., 2025; Xu et al., 2026). However, these approaches often rely heavily on external refactoring detection tools or curated ex-amples, limiting scalability and language coverage. Concurrent work, CodeTaste (Thillen et al., 2026), extends commit-based benchmarks to multilingual and multi-file refactoring tasks, resulting in more complex and realistic evaluation settings that better reflect real-world software development practices. In summary, existing refactoring benchmarks either rely on manually constructed datasets that are costly and limited in scale, or mine refactoring instances from repository commits that inevitably mix refactoring with other code changes, leading to limited coverage, scalability, or data purity. 

3 SmellBench 

This section is organized as follows: First, we pro-vide a brief description of the 7 smell types. Next, we present the construction pipeline of the bench-mark, which consists of four steps. Finally, we describe the evaluation process and the definition of 3 metrics. 

3.1 Smell Types 

Code smells are a long-established abstraction in software engineering for characterizing structural design deficiencies that motivate refactoring. Im-1 3 42Repository   

> Selection
> Candidate
> Discovery Smell Injection Quality
> Validation
> Open -source
> Repositories
> Repository
> Pool
> Docker Environment
> Coarse Filtering
> Agent Localization
> Smell Spec.
> Candidates

. . . 

Agent  

> Smell injection
> Smell Spec.
> Clean Code
> (Ground Truth)
> Smelly Code
> (Generated)
> Test Collection
> Test Execution
> Fail Pass
> Retry
> Valid
> SmellBench

Figure 3: SmellBench construction pipeline: Repository Selection to collect repositories, Candidate Discovery to identify suitable injection locations, Smell Injection to introduce controlled code smells, and Quality Validation to validate correctness and benchmark reliability. The latter three stages are executed in a Dockerized environment. 

portantly, they naturally encode refactoring objec-tives that go beyond local edits, often involving interactions across functions, classes, and files. By grounding refactoring tasks in a curated set of repre-sentative code smell types, we can construct refac-toring scenarios that are both structurally meaning-ful and amenable to controlled evaluation. Specifically, we instantiate refactoring tasks us-ing 7 representative smell types (Fowler, 1999). Their formal definitions refer to Appendix C and illustrative toy examples are provided in Figure 1. 

3.2 Benchmark Construction 

The construction of SmellBench follows four steps: collecting real-world software repositories, identi-fying suitable injection locations, introducing code smells into clean code, and validating functional correctness using test cases. The overall workflow is illustrated in Figure 3. 

3.2.1 Repository Selection 

We select 7 Python repositories from top-ranked PyPI projects as our codebases. Popular, large-scale repositories are preferred due to their mature contributor guidelines, more comprehensive test coverage, and complex code dependencies. 

3.2.2 Candidate Discovery 

Following repository collection, we identify appro-priate locations for injecting specific code smells. This stage is designed to ensure both coverage and validity of injection locations. First, real-world software repositories are typically large and het-erogeneous. Allowing a code agent to search for injection locations without constraints can lead to location bias, where the agent disproportionately selects candidates from early-accessed files while neglecting other suitable regions of the codebase. Second, code smells are not universally applicable. Each smell type imposes distinct structural or se-mantic requirements, meaning that only a subset of functions or classes constitute valid injection locations. Consequently, candidate selection must be guided by smell-specific constraints rather than unrestricted search. Along this line, Candidate Dis-covery is decomposed into two submodules: 

Coarse Filtering. This module reduces the search space by pre-selecting files that are more likely to contain meaningful injection targets. In our current setup, we retain source files exceeding 500 lines of code, which prioritizes files with suf-ficient structural richness for multi-file refactoring scenarios. 

Agent Localization. Given the filtered files, a code agent is used to identify candidates that sat-isfy the requirements of the smell specification. The code agent excels at program comprehension and contextual reasoning to analyze code seman-tics, dependencies, and structural patterns, ensur-ing more reliable identification of smell injection candidates than rule-based matching approaches. Notably, This step focuses exclusively on locating and selecting candidates and does not perform any code modifications. The resulting candidate set is passed to the subsequent smell injection stage. 

3.2.3 Smell Injection 

After obtaining clean code candidates, this stage au-tomatically constructs code samples containing tar-get code smells. Specifically, the code agent is fed with candidates and the smell specification, which directly modifies the original code to introduce the target smell while preserving compilability. In contrast to prior methods, this stage relies solely on a sufficiently powerful code agent (e.g., OpenHands + Claude Sonnet 4.5), and therefore frees from programming language, external tools or any commit histories. As a result, SmellBench is theoretically capable of producing unlimited num-ber of cases via injecting various smells across dif-ferent candidates, which overcomes the challenges of scalability and diversity arising from commit-based approaches. To facilitate a systematic analysis of agent behav-ior, we further introduce 3 levels of case difficulty and 2 types of instruction settings. These configura-tions allow us to examine how code agents respond to varying levels of task complexity and instruc-tional constraints. Detailed information of these settings are provided in Appendix D and E. Finally, we retain both the original and modified versions of the code, forming paired clean–smelly samples that serve as the basis for subsequent qual-ity validation and evaluation. 

3.2.4 Quality Validation 

Recall that refactoring tasks aim to improve code structure while preserving program semantics and utility. Therefore, we are supposed to ensure func-tional correctness of smelly code, i.e., the created smelly code must pass the unit tests. To this end, we collect test suites related to the smelly code and execute the associated tests. Specifically, coverage analysis is employed to deter-mine which test cases cover the methods contained in the smelly code. Each smelly instance include several methods and each method is associated with at most 10 relevant test cases. Test-failing cases, along with their error messages, are fed back to the code agent in Smell Injection stage for rectifi-cation to enhance both pass rates and generation efficiency. Finally, cases are filtered out if no rele-vant tests available or if the tests fail again. This test-based validation process allows Smell-Bench to retain high-quality and non-trivial refac-toring cases, supporting a comprehensive assess-ment of code agent refactoring capabilities. After these four steps, we finally generate 294 valid samples with 7 smell types, 3 difficulty lev-els and 2 instruction settings across 7 repositories. The statistics of the SmellBench are illustrated in Figure 2, where each category is evenly distributed, demonstrating the controllability of the construc-tion pipeline. 

3.3 Evaluation Framework 

To comprehensively assess code agents in refac-toring tasks, we examine not only whether their changes pass existing tests but also the overall qual-ity of the refactoring in terms of structural sound-ness and smell elimination. Specifically, our evalua-tion consists of three aspects, including test passing rate to ensure functional correctness, localization accuracy to assess the identification of refactoring targets, and LLM-based judgment to evaluate the refactoring quality. 

Test Pass Rate. Test pass rate (TPR) measures whether the code refactors preserve the original program behavior. A refactoring is considered suc-cessful if the refactored program passes the entire test suite. Otherwise, it is counted as a failure. 

Localization Accuracy. Localization accuracy (LA) evaluates whether a code agent correctly iden-tifies the code locations that require refactoring. Depending on the smell type, localization is eval-uated at either the class level or the method level. A prediction is considered correct if the identified class or method matches the ground-truth refactor-ing target. 

LLM-as-Judge. LLM-as-Judge employs LLMs to assess refactoring quality from four comple-mentary aspects: code quality (CQ), which mea-sures readability and maintainability improve-ments; structural soundness (SS), which evaluates the correctness and rationality of the refactored structure; cross-file coordination (CC), which as-sesses consistency and dependency handling across multiple files; and smell elimination (SE), which measures the effectiveness of removing the targeted code smells. The detailed rubric information can be found in Appendix F. Table 1: Performance comparison of different agents and LLMs on SmellBench. Oracle means the ground truth, TPR represents the Test Pass Rate, LA denotes the Localization Accuracy, CQ is code quality, SS stands for structural soundness, CC refers to cross-file coordination, SE indicates smell elimination. The bold numbers indicate the best results. 

Agent LLM TPR LA LLM-as-Judge CQ SS CC SE Oracle - 1.0 1.0 0.9592 0.9626 0.9884 0.9660 OpenHands Qwen-Coder-30B-A3B 0.8021 0.7067 0.4649 0.4110 0.3014 0.3004 Qwen-Coder-480B-A35B 0.8258 0.7456 0.5647 0.5084 0.3962 0.4080 DeepSeek-V3.2 0.8790 0.7224 0.5801 0.5203 0.3804 0.3733 Gemini-2.5-Flash 0.5272 0.6667 0.4041 0.3592 0.2323 0.2327 GPT-5-Mini 0.9286 0.7721 0.6146 0.5418 0.4316 0.4235 Claude-Sonnet-4.5 0.9116 0.8401 0.6779 0.6139 0.4881 0.4793 Qwen Code Qwen-Coder-30B-A3B 0.7789 0.6701 0.4203 0.3574 0.2344 0.2251 Qwen-Coder-480B-A35B 0.8197 0.6531 0.4573 0.3990 0.2812 0.2867 DeepSeek-V3.2 0.8571 0.4966 0.3677 0.3248 0.2405 0.2503 Gemini-2.5-Flash 0.6633 0.6395 0.4163 0.3735 0.2231 0.2279 GPT-5-Mini 0.9218 0.7483 0.5626 0.4871 0.3238 0.3255 Claude-Sonnet-4.5 0.9388 0.8878 0.6929 0.6405 0.5143 0.5034 

In LLM-as-Judge part, the LLM conducts a com-parative analysis between the code smells and the refactoring results from agent, and derives an eval-uation judgment. However, this process demands strong contextual understanding and reasoning ca-pabilities from the LLM to disentangle the struc-tural issues and logical relationships implicitly em-bedded in complex code smells, which can easily lead to inconsistent evaluation outcomes across different LLMs. To enable stable and consistent conclusions among different models, we introduce a preliminary step, Smell Analysis. 

Smell Analysis. Smell analysis explicitly ana-lyzes and summarizes the code smells to clarify the corresponding structural issues and refactoring ob-jectives, and provides clear and unified contextual grounding for subsequent LLM-based evaluation. Please refer to Figure 16 for examples. Notably, SmellBench has been integrated with the Harbor framework (Harbor Framework Team, 2026), which performs evaluation within Docker environments and supports a wide range of popular code agents. 

4 Experiments 

4.1 Experimental Settings Model. To examine whether existing code agents can effectively address refactoring issues, we select some of the most popular and powerful agents to-gether with representative LLMs. Specifically, we choose two widely used open - source agents, Open-Hands (Wang et al., 2024) and Qwen Code (Yang et al., 2025), paired with six large language models (LLMs), including three cutting -edge open - source models — Qwen3 - Coder - 30B - A3B -Instruct (Yang et al., 2025), Qwen3 - Coder -480B - A35B -Instruct (Yang et al., 2025), and DeepSeek - V3.2 (Liu et al., 2025a) — and three closed-source models — GPT-5- Mini (Achiam et al., 2023), Gemini-2.5 - Flash (Comanici et al., 2025), and Claude Sonnet -4.5 (Anthropic, 2025). 

Settings. All experiments are conducted using the Harbor framework in a Docker-based isolated environment. Agents are granted full permission to freely modify the codebase without human ap-proval. We evaluate two instruction settings, includ-ing a guided setting with only involved files and smell types and a targeted setting with additional involved methods and classes. Each task is exe-cuted with a maximum time budget of 20 minutes, and due to computational cost, each configuration is run only once. 

4.2 Overall Performance 

We report the overall performance in Table 1, which presents the code refactoring capabilities evalu-ated across two open-source agents and six large TPR                                         

> LA SE
> CC
> SS CQ
> 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Feature Envy
> TPR
> LA SE
> CC
> SS CQ
> 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> God Classes
> TPR
> LA SE
> CC
> SS CQ
> 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Data Clumps
> TPR
> LA SE
> CC
> SS CQ
> 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Shotgun Surgery
> TPR
> LA SE
> CC
> SS CQ
> 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Dead Code
> TPR
> LA SE
> CC
> SS CQ
> 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Interface Segregation
> TPR
> LA SE
> CC
> SS CQ
> 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Deep Inlining
> Claude-Sonnet-4.5 Gemini-Flash-2.5 GPT-5-mini DeepSeek-V3.2 Qwen3-Coder-480B-A35B Qwen-Coder-30B-A3B

Figure 4: Performance comparison of 7 smell types under different LLMs with the OpenHands Agent. 6 metrics are adopted for comprehensive evaluation. 

language models (LLMs). The Oracle row repre-sents the original clean code before smell injec-tion, achieving 0.96–0.99 scores rather than perfect 1.0 due to the LLM judge’s inherent conservatism in applying rubrics. This provides a calibration reference for interpreting absolute scores. From the results, we obtain the following key observa-tions. (1) Refactoring task is still challenging for SOTA baselines . Even the best-performing baseline, QwenCode + Claude Sonnet 4.5, only achieved a Smell Elimination (SE) score of 0.5034 (see Appendix F for details) , highlighting the sig-nificant gap between current code generation ca-pabilities and the deeper structural reasoning re-quired for high-quality refactoring. (2) Test Pass-ing Rate is not suitable for refactoring task. 

Except for Gemini 2.5 Flash, almost all mod-els achieve TPRs above 80%, indicating that cur-rent models place strong emphasis on preserving functional correctness. In addition, the scores for Code Quality and Structural Soundness (SS) are also relatively high, further reinforcing this observation. (3) Open - source models also ex-hibit strong competitiveness in code refactor-ing tasks. Qwen-Coder-480B-A35B achieves a smell elimination score of 0.4080 and 0.2867 with OpenHands and QwenCode, respectively, compa-rable to GPT-5-Mini (0.4235 and 0.3255, respec-tively). This demonstrates the rapid advancement of open - source LLMs and their potential to rival closed-source models in complex code understand-ing and refactoring tasks. (4) OpenHands demon-strates better performance than Qwen Code when coupled with weaker LLMs . However, as the LLM capacity increases, the performance gap between the two agents narrows. This suggests that OpenHands possesses stronger exploration capabil-ities, enabling more effective utilization of limited model capacity. When the LLM becomes more powerful, the upper bound of performance is con-strained by the model’s inherent ability, leading both agents to converge toward similar results. 

4.3 Analysis of Smell Types 

In this subsection, we further analyze the perfor-mance of the seven code smells under different model configurations. The experiments employ OpenHands as the agent framework and select six representative large language models as backends. We evaluate the results using six metrics to re-veal the differences in how various LLMs han-dle structural code issues. Based on the results shown in Figure 4, we make the following observa-tions: (1) Different code smells exhibit significant performance variations across different LLMs. 

Model rankings vary substantially across smell types. DeepSeek-V3.2 excels on Data Clumps and Deep Inlining, while performing less effectively on Interface Segregation, suggesting stronger struc-tural reasoning than architectural design capabil-Oracle     

> Sonnet 4.5
> GPT-5 mini
> DS V3.2
> Qwen3 480B
> Qwen3 30B
> Gemini Flash
> 0
> 50
> 100
> Score (%)
> (a) Performance
> Easy Med Hard
> Oracle
> Sonnet 4.5
> GPT-5 mini
> DS V3.2
> Qwen3 480B
> Qwen3 30B
> Gemini Flash
> 0
> 2
> 4
> Files Modified
> (b) Files Modified
> Easy Med Hard

Figure 5: Performance comparison across difficulty lev-els. (a) scores (average of CQ, SS, CF, and SE) for Oracle and six models on Easy, Medium, and Hard tasks. (b) Number of files modified by each model. 

ities. GPT-5-Mini consistently achieves high test pass rates but is less competitive on design-oriented refactorings. These variations indicate that differ-ent smells emphasize different capabilities rather than a single notion of refactoring ability. (2) All models perform poorly on Shotgun Surgery . Fix-ing Shotgun Surgery requires coordinated modifi-cations across multiple files. Statistics show that this type of smell involves an average of 5.7 files, which is significantly higher than the overall aver-age of 2.5 files. However, Claude Sonnet 4.5 modi-fies only 2.7 files on average when addressing this smell. This suggests that current approaches still have substantial limitations in handling multi-file coordinated modifications. (3) All models achieve strong performance on Deep Inlining. Repairing this type of smell mainly relies on the model’s abil-ity to decompose code and perform deep reasoning. The experimental results indicate that all models perform well in these aspects, enabling them to effectively address this code smell. 

4.4 Analysis of Difficulty Levels 

This section mainly analyzes the impact of differ-ent difficulty levels on the number of task instances and model performance. By comparing the three difficulty levels—Easy, Medium, and Hard—we investigate the relationship between task difficulty and model capability. All experiments are con-ducted using OpenHands as the agent framework. Based on the results shown in Figure 5, we draw the following conclusions: (1) As shown in Fig-ure 5(a), the performance of all models gradually declines as the difficulty level increases, demon-strating the rationality of the benchmark’s difficulty design. (2) Open-source models perform well on easy tasks but show relatively poor performance on difficult tasks, indicating that their deep reason-ing capabilities still lag behind strong models such as Claude Sonnet 4.5. (3) Figure 5(b) shows that the number of involved files increases significantly as task difficulty rises. However, the number of modified files by all models does not increase cor-respondingly. This suggests that existing models, including Claude Sonnet 4.5, still exhibit substan-tial limitations in multi-file coordination. 

4.5 Error Analysis 0 20 40 60 80 100 

> Percentage (%)
> Claude Sonnet-4-5
> GPT-5 Mini
> Qwen3-Coder-480B
> Qwen3-Coder-30B
> DeepSeek-V3.2
> Gemini 2.5-Flash
> Error Distribution by Model
> Timeout
> Loc. Fail
> Test Fail
> No Output
> Incomplete
> Wrong Fix
> Other
> Success

Figure 6: Error distribution of six LLM models on the SmellBench. 

This section presents an analysis of model fail-ure cases, which serve as a critical window for un-derstanding model boundaries, facilitating targeted model selection while providing a more compre-hensive perspective for the SmellBench evaluation framework. Specifically, we employed OpenHands as the agent, leveraging DeepSeek V3.2 as a LLM-based classification tool to perform fine-grained categorization of failure cases. This yielded six distinct error categories plus an “Other” category covering sparse error types. According to Figure 6, we have the following key findings: (1) AgentTime-out is a prominent issue. Severe timeout phenom-ena were observed across all models, reflecting the inherent complexity of the tasks—models require extended reasoning and multi-round revisions. No-tably, DeepSeek exhibited a timeout rate as high as 77%. Further analysis revealed that the model engaged in excessively lengthy reasoning actions, rendering it unable to complete tasks within the limited time. (2) Bottleneck in localization capa-bilities. Location Failure accounts for a substantial proportion of errors across all models. This indi-cates that current models still face challenges in precisely localizing the positions of code smells. (3) Insufficient repair and coordination capabilities. Wrong Fix and Incomplete errors both accounted for notable proportions. This suggests that while models have acquired method-level localization ca-pabilities, there still remain substantial room for improvement in formulating concrete repair strate-gies that how to fix refactor cases and performing cross-file coordinated editing. 

5 Conclusion 

In this paper, we present SmellBench , an extensi-ble benchmark for repository-level code refactor-ing through proactive code smell injection. Smell-Bench contains 294 refactoring cases across 7 smell types and introduces a multi-dimensional evalua-tion framework beyond functional correctness. Ex-periments on 2 code agents and 6 representative LLMs show that current models still struggle with complex cross-file refactoring tasks, highlighting substantial gaps in repository-level reasoning and software maintainability capabilities. 

Limitations 

We acknowledge several limitations of SmellBench. (1) Since developers may not strictly comply with coding best practices, some code smells, such as God Classes, may naturally exist in the original repositories, which could introduce noise and re-duce the reliability of the evaluation results. (2) The current smell injection process exhibits certain similarities across cases, it may encourage models to adopt similar solving patterns, which in turn re-duces the diversity of SmellBench. (3) The use of LLM-as-Judge for evaluation introduces potential bias, as the assessment results may be influenced by the capability and inherent preferences of the judging model. This could affect the objectivity and stability of the evaluation outcomes. 

Ethical Impact 

In this paper, we introduce SmellBench, a bench-mark designed to evaluate the code refactoring and maintainability capabilities of Code Agents. We recognize and explicitly address the following ethi-cal implications associated with our work: 

Data Privacy, Copyright, and Licensing. All source code and software projects included in SmellBench are constructed from [publicly avail-able open-source repositories / synthetically gen-erated pipelines / curated public datasets]. We have strictly adhered to the original licensing agree-ments (e.g., MIT, Apache 2.0) of all foundational codebeds. We conducted thorough data filtering to ensure that no Personally Identifiable Information (PII), proprietary vendor code, or sensitive data is included in our benchmark. 

Code Safety and Dual-Use Risks. While evalu-ating and enhancing code refactoring capabilities promotes software maintainability and mitigates technical debt, there is a minor risk of "dual-use." Specifically, automated refactoring agents could inadvertently introduce logic flaws, hidden security vulnerabilities (e.g., CWEs), or anti-patterns if de-ployed in production environments without human supervision. To mitigate this risk, we emphasize that SmellBench is strictly a diagnostic evaluation framework. We strongly advocate that code gen-erated or refactored by LLM-based agents should undergo mandatory human-in-the-loop code review before deployment in mission-critical software sys-tems. 

References         

> Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, and 1 others. 2023. Gpt-4 techni-cal report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 .AI Aider. 2023. Aider: Ai pair programming in your terminal. Anthropic. 2025. Claude model report. https://www. anthropic.com/transparency/model-report .Accessed 2026-02-09. Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan, Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, and 1 others. 2021. Program synthesis with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07732 .Mark Chen. 2021. Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 .Gheorghe Comanici, Eric Bieber, Mike Schaekermann, Ice Pasupat, Noveen Sachdeva, Inderjit Dhillon, Mar-cel Blistein, Ori Ram, Dan Zhang, Evan Rosen, and 1 others. 2025. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with advanced reasoning, multimodality, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.06261 .Yangruibo Ding, Zijian Wang, Wasi Ahmad, Hantian Ding, Ming Tan, Nihal Jain, Murali Krishna Ra-manathan, Ramesh Nallapati, Parminder Bhatia, Dan Roth, and 1 others. 2023. Crosscodeeval: A diverse and multilingual benchmark for cross-file code com-pletion. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:46701–46723.

Ion George Dinu, Marian Cristian Mih˘ aescu, and Tra-ian Rebedea. 2026. Smellbench: Evaluating llm agents on architectural code smell repair. Preprint ,arXiv:2605.07001. Xueying Du, Mingwei Liu, Kaixin Wang, Hanlin Wang, Junwei Liu, Yixuan Chen, Jiayi Feng, Chaofeng Sha, Xin Peng, and Yiling Lou. 2023. Classe-val: A manually-crafted benchmark for evaluating llms on class-level code generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.01861 .Martin Fowler. 1999. Refactoring: Improving the De-sign of Existing Code . Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA, USA. Spandan Garg, Roshanak Zilouchian Moghaddam, and Neel Sundaresan. 2025. Perfbench: Can agents re-solve real-world performance bugs? arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.24091 .Dhruv Gautam, Spandan Garg, Jinu Jang, Neel Sun-daresan, and Roshanak Zilouchian Moghaddam. 2025. Refactorbench: Evaluating stateful reason-ing in language agents through code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.07832 .Harbor Framework Team. 2026. Harbor: A framework for evaluating and optimizing agents and models in container environments. Naman Jain, King Han, Alex Gu, Wen-Ding Li, Fanjia Yan, Tianjun Zhang, Sida Wang, Armando Solar-Lezama, Koushik Sen, and Ion Stoica. 2024. Live-codebench: Holistic and contamination free eval-uation of large language models for code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.07974 .Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2023. Swe-bench: Can language mod-els resolve real-world github issues? arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06770 .Ziga Kovacic, Justin T Chiu, Celine Lee, Went-ing Zhao, and Kevin Ellis. 2025. Refactoring codebases through library design. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.11058 .Yonnel Chen Kuang Piao, Jean Carlors Paul, Leuson Da Silva, Arghavan Moradi Dakhel, Mohammad Hamdaqa, and Foutse Khomh. 2025. Refactoring with llms: Bridging human expertise and machine understanding. arXiv e-prints , pages arXiv–2510. Aixin Liu, Aoxue Mei, Bangcai Lin, Bing Xue, Bingx-uan Wang, Bingzheng Xu, Bochao Wu, Bowei Zhang, Chaofan Lin, Chen Dong, and 1 others. 2025a. Deepseek-v3. 2: Pushing the frontier of open large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.02556 .Bo Liu, Yanjie Jiang, Yuxia Zhang, Nan Niu, Guangjie Li, and Hui Liu. 2025b. Exploring the potential of general purpose llms in automated software refactor-ing: an empirical study. Automated Software Engi-neering , 32(1):26. Tianyang Liu, Canwen Xu, and Julian McAuley. 2023. Repobench: Benchmarking repository-level code auto-completion systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03091 .Mike A. Merrill, Alexander G. Shaw, Nicholas Car-lini, Boxuan Li, Harsh Raj, Ivan Bercovich, Lin Shi, Jeong Yeon Shin, Thomas Walshe, E. Kelly Buchanan, Junhong Shen, Guanghao Ye, Haowei Lin, Jason Poulos, Maoyu Wang, Marianna Nezhurina, Je-nia Jitsev, Di Lu, Orfeas Menis Mastromichalakis, and 66 others. 2026. Terminal-bench: Benchmark-ing agents on hard, realistic tasks in command line interfaces. Preprint , arXiv:2601.11868. Ziyi Ni, Huacan Wang, Shuo Zhang, Shuo Lu, Ziyang He, Wang You, Zhenheng Tang, Yuntao Du, Bill Sun, Hongzhang Liu, and 1 others. 2025. Gittaskbench: A benchmark for code agents solving real-world tasks through code repository leveraging. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.18993 .Dorin Pomian, Abhiram Bellur, Malinda Dilhara, Za-rina Kurbatova, Egor Bogomolov, Timofey Bryksin, and Danny Dig. 2024. Next-generation refactoring: Combining llm insights and ide capabilities for ex-tract method. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME) ,pages 275–287. IEEE. Md Raihan Tapader, Md Mostafizer Rahman, Ari-ful Islam Shiplu, Md Faizul Ibne Amin, and Yutaka Watanobe. 2025. Code refactoring with llm: A com-prehensive evaluation with few-shot settings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.21788 .Alex Thillen, Niels Mündler, Veselin Raychev, and Martin T. Vechev. 2026. Codetaste: Can llms generate human-level code refactorings? CoRR ,abs/2603.04177. Xingyao Wang, Boxuan Li, Yufan Song, Frank F Xu, Xiangru Tang, Mingchen Zhuge, Jiayi Pan, Yueqi Song, Bowen Li, Jaskirat Singh, and 1 oth-ers. 2024. Openhands: An open platform for ai soft-ware developers as generalist agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.16741 .Yisen Xu, Jinqiu Yang, Tse-Hsun, and Chen. 2026. Swe-refactor: A repository-level benchmark for real-world llm-based code refactoring. Preprint ,arXiv:2602.03712. Kaiwen Yan, Hongcheng Guo, Xuanqing Shi, Jingyi Xu, Yaonan Gu, and Zhoujun Li. 2025. Codeif: Benchmarking the instruction-following capabilities of large language models for code generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.19166 .An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, and 1 others. 2025. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 .Table 2: Statistics of SmellBench.                                              

> Project Lines Files Methods Tests Count
> click 209 3.4 3.8 24.0 42 jinja 199 3.2 4.2 23.1 42 numpy 241 6.9 4.1 11.4 42 pandas 281 3.4 4.9 37.6 42 scikit 221 2.9 4.3 21.0 42 seaborn 193 3.1 4.1 20.5 42 xarray 284 3.6 4.5 23.6 42
> Overall 232.5 3.8 4.3 23.0 294

John Yang, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. 2024. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:50528– 50652. Daoguang Zan, Zhirong Huang, Wei Liu, Hanwu Chen, Linhao Zhang, Shulin Xin, Lu Chen, Qi Liu, Xiao-jian Zhong, Aoyan Li, Siyao Liu, Yongsheng Xiao, Liangqiang Chen, Yuyu Zhang, Jing Su, Tianyu Liu, Rui Long, Kai Shen, and Liang Xiang. 2025. Multi-swe-bench: A multilingual benchmark for issue re-solving. Preprint , arXiv:2504.02605. Terry Yue Zhuo, Minh Chien Vu, Jenny Chim, Han Hu, Wenhao Yu, Ratnadira Widyasari, Imam Nur Bani Yusuf, Haolan Zhan, Junda He, Indraneil Paul, and 1 others. 2024. Bigcodebench: Benchmarking code generation with diverse function calls and complex instructions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.15877 .

A Datasets 

Table 2 summarizes the statistics of the Smell-Bench benchmark. The benchmark contains 294 cases covering seven widely used open-source Python projects: click , jinja , numpy , pandas ,

scikit-learn , seaborn , and xarray . On aver-age, each case involves 232.5 lines of code changes, 3.8 files, and 4.3 methods, highlighting the complex multi-file and tightly coupled refactoring character-istics of SmellBench. Moreover, each case contains an average of 23.0 test cases to ensure functional correctness of our SmellBench. 

B Token Consumption 

In this section, we discuss the token consumption of our framework. The total token usage consists of two components: generation pipeline consumption and evaluation consumption. As the token cost of the LLM-as-Judge stage is negligible compared to the other components, we omit it from the statistics. 0 2 4 6     

> Tokens (M)
> pandas
> xarray
> click
> numpy
> scikit-learn
> seaborn
> jinja
> (a) By Project
> 024
> Tokens (M)
> GC
> DC
> IS
> DI
> SS
> DCE
> FE
> (b) By Smell Type
> Input Output Cache Create Cache Read

Figure 7: Token consumption in the generation pipeline: (a) grouped by repository; (b) grouped by smell type. 

B.1 Token Consumption in the Generation 

The generation pipeline introduces token consump-tion in three stages: Candidate Discovery, Smell Injection, and Fixing Errors. All cases in our ex-periments were generated using Claude Code with Claude Opus 4.6. Detailed statistics for different repositories and smell types are shown below. Figure 7 shows that generating one case con-sumes around 2M tokens on average. Most of these tokens are cached tokens, which helps reduce the actual cost significantly. The click, seaborn, and pandas repositories exhibit the highest token consumption. This is mainly because candidate methods in these repositories contain complex de-pendencies and strong interconnections, requiring multiple synchronized modifications during code transformation. Similarly, the data clumps smell type often requires modifications across multiple locations, making the identification of related methods highly expensive in terms of tokens. Furthermore, god classes are usually located in large classes or files, where understanding class functionality and depen-dencies requires substantial contextual reasoning, leading to higher token consumption. 

B.2 Token Consumption in Evaluation 

In this subsection, we further analyze the rela-tionship between model performance and token consumption in order to investigate which models achieve a better trade-off. Based on OpenHands as the evaluation framework, we evaluated the per-formance and token consumption of six different LLMs. The results are shown in Figure 8. The experimental results indicate that Sonnet 4.5 achieves the best overall performance among all evaluated models, while maintaining token con-0 1 2 3 4 5 6

> Avg Total Tokens (Millions)
> 20
> 25
> 30
> 35
> 40
> 45
> 50
> 55
> 60
> Aspect 3 (Judge) %
> Model Performance: Aspect 3 (Judge) vs Total Token Consumption
> Sonnet 4.5
> gemini-flash-2.5
> gpt5-mini
> DeepSeekV3.2
> Qwen3-Coder-30B-A3B
> Qwen3-Coder-480B-A35B

Figure 8: Comparison of model accuracy and efficiency. Higher scores with lower token consumption indicate better efficiency. 

sumption within an acceptable range, demonstrat-ing strong overall efficiency. In contrast, the open-source models DeepSeek V3.2 and Qwen3-Coder-480B-A35B exhibit performance and token con-sumption comparable to gpt-5-mini, suggesting that recent high-performance open-source models are increasingly capable of matching the effective-ness and efficiency of proprietary models. By comparison, Gemini-Flash-2.5 shows rela-tively weaker overall capability due to its earlier release. It not only consumes more tokens during evaluation, but also significantly underperforms compared with the other models. 

C Smell Types 

This appendix section describes the code smell types used to construct refactoring cases in our benchmark. Each smell represents a recurring struc-tural deficiency that motivates non-trivial refactor-ing beyond local edits, often involving interactions across functions, classes, or files. 

C.1 Feature Envy Definition. Methods that rely heavily on data or behavior from other classes, indicating misplaced responsibilities and poor encapsulation. Such meth-ods are often better located in the classes whose data they primarily manipulate. 

Required Capabilities. Refactoring Feature Envy requires semantic understanding of responsi-bility ownership, accurate localization of misplaced methods, and coordinated updates to inter-class de-pendencies when responsibilities are redistributed across class boundaries. 

C.2 God Classes Definition. Classes that accumulate excessive re-sponsibilities, resulting in low cohesion, high com-plexity, and strong coupling with other parts of the system. These classes are typically decomposed into smaller and more cohesive components. 

Required Capabilities. Addressing God Classes requires architectural reasoning to identify latent responsibility groups, synthesize appropriate class decompositions, and maintain consistency across affected modules after restructuring. 

C.3 Data Clumps Definition. Groups of variables that frequently appear together across method signatures, construc-tors, or class interfaces, suggesting missing domain abstractions. 

Required Capabilities. Refactoring Data Clumps requires recognizing recurring structural patterns, inferring higher-level abstractions, and introducing suitable parameter objects or domain concepts while preserving existing behavior. 

C.4 Shotgun Surgery Definition. A design problem in which a single conceptual change requires modifications in many scattered locations throughout the codebase, indi-cating poor localization of responsibilities. 

Required Capabilities. Eliminating Shotgun Surgery requires repository-scale dependency anal-ysis, accurate identification of all affected locations, and coordinated modifications across multiple files to consolidate change responsibilities. 

C.5 Dead Code Elimination Definition. The presence of unreachable, redun-dant, or unused code elements that no longer con-tribute to program functionality and can be safely removed. 

Required Capabilities. Refactoring dead code primarily requires reachability analysis, depen-dency tracking, and behavior-preserving code re-moval to ensure that no hidden usages or execution paths are disrupted. 

C.6 Interface Segregation Definition. Overly broad interfaces that force clients to depend on methods they do not use, vi-olating the Interface Segregation Principle and in-creasing unnecessary coupling. Required Capabilities. Refactoring this smell re-quires object-oriented design reasoning to identify coherent interface boundaries, decompose large in-terfaces into focused abstractions, and consistently propagate interface changes to implementations and clients. 

C.7 Deep Inlining Definition. A refactoring scenario in which deeply nested call chains are collapsed into a sin-gle caller, reducing indirection but substantially increasing local implementation complexity while preserving semantics. 

Required Capabilities. Successfully performing deep inlining requires accurate call-chain analy-sis, dependency tracking within nested execution paths, and behavior-preserving local code transfor-mations that maintain correctness despite increased complexity. 

D Difficulty Levels 

Each refactoring case is further stratified into three difficulty levels ( easy , medium , and hard ) to con-trol structural complexity and refactoring effort. Difficulty is determined by factors such as the num-ber of files involved, and how strongly the smell is obscured by legitimate-looking design patterns. As an illustrative example, the difficulty specifi-cation for Feature Envy is defined as follows: • Easy : Move one method’s core logic to access another class’s data directly, spanning exactly two files, with explicit foreign attribute access revealing the envy. • Medium : Distribute a method’s logic across three or more files via indirect delegation chains (e.g., A calls B which accesses C’s internal data), hide the dependency behind wrapper or adapter patterns, and interleave it with legitimate helper methods to introduce diff noise. • Hard : Introduce envy through mixin, decora-tor, or dynamic dispatch patterns so that the cross-class dependency appears intentional; span four or more files with indirect coupling (e.g., callbacks or shared state), include at least one red herring, and require semantic understanding to identify the smell. These difficulty specifications are directly incor-porated into the prompt used for case generation. Detailed specifications for all smell types and diffi-culty levels are provided in smell_types.json in the https://github.com/MINE-USTC/SmellBench . 

E Instruction Settings 

We define two instruction settings to evaluate dif-ferent aspects of model capability: guided and tar-geted . Instructions are generated at the instance level, meaning that each refactoring case is associ-ated with a distinct natural-language prompt. • Guided : The instruction specifies only the smell type and the affected file, requiring the model to first localize the smell before per-forming refactoring. • Targeted : The instruction specifies the smell type, file, and the exact class or method in-volved, focusing the task on executing the refactoring itself. For example, for case b49a19838bb , the guided 

instruction is: Feature envy has been detected in 

src/click/core.py . Can you elimi-nate this smell by moving the logic to a more appropriate location? The corresponding targeted instruction is: The parse_args method in the Command 

class within src/click/core.py ex-hibits feature envy. Please address this design issue by relocating the behavior to where the data naturally belongs. To further investigate how task complexity in-fluences the model’s performance under different prompt granularities, we break down the experi-mental results by difficulty levels (easy, medium, and hard). Table 3 presents the Test Passing Rate (TPR), Localization Accuracy (LA), and average score of LLM-as-Judge (LLM), alongside token consumption. Based on the multi-dimensional breakdown in Table 3, we obtain several insightful observations: • Decoupling of Passing Rate and Quality: 

While the TPR remains high ( > 0.87 ) across all tasks, high functional correctness does not guarantee good refactoring. In the Guided 

setting, despite strong TPR, the LA locates at 0.65–0.67, leading to poor code quality scores from the LLM judge. Table 3: Performance and Token Consumption Across Multi-Level Difficulties. Tokens are measured in Mil-lions                              

> Setting Diff TPR LA LLM Tokens
> Guided Easy 0.9184 0.6735 0.4695 1.5 Med 0.8776 0.6531 0.4994 2.1 Hard 0.9796 0.6735 0.3652 1.7 Targeted Easy 0.9592 0.9184 0.5773 1.3 Med 0.8776 0.9184 0.5670 1.4 Hard 0.9592 0.7959 0.3431 1.9

• Severe Self-Localization Deficiency: LLMs exhibit extremely weak autonomous defect localization. In the Guided setting, LA stag-nates at a low 0.65–0.67 regardless of task difficulty. Providing explicit Targeted instruc-tion eliminates this bottleneck, boosting LA up to 0.9184. This contrast highlights a clear performance deficiency of LLMs in identify-ing code smells autonomously. • Localization Token Overhead: Broadly speaking, token consumption scales up with the increase in task difficulty across both set-tings. However, when examining the horizon-tal differences, the Guided setting does not consistently consume more tokens than Tar-geted , even using fewer tokens in hard tasks (1.7M vs. 1.9M). By analyzing the trajec-tories, we find that the code agent does not waste extensive steps on localization. Instead, it rapidly settles on a plausible location and proceeds directly to refactoring. This behav-ior explains both the restricted token costs and the sub-optimal LA under the Guided config-uration. 

F Rubrics 

In this subsection, we present the scoring crite-ria for the four rubrics. Specifically, we adopt a 10-point scoring system, where a corresponding description is provided for every two-point interval. For better presentation and readability, Table 1 con-verts these scores into a normalized 1-point scale. The detailed criteria are as follows: • Code Quality . Improves code clarity, style, and overall quality to make the code easier to understand and maintain. - 0-1 score: Significantly worse readability than before. - 2-3 score: Poor quality; hard to follow. - 4-5 score: Below average; multiple readabil-ity concerns. - 6-7 score: Acceptable quality; some naming or structural issues. - 8-9 score: Good quality; minor naming or style improvements possible. - 10 score: Clean, idiomatic, well-named, easy to maintain. • Structural Soundness . Maintains a well-organized architecture with clear module boundaries and reliable design principles - 0-1 score: Introduces new code smells or anti-patterns. - 2-3 score: Significant structural problems. - 4-5 score: Noticeable structural issues; re-sponsibilities not well separated. - 6-7 score: Reasonable but some unnecessary complexity. - 8-9 score: Sound structure with minor imper-fections. - 10 score: Proper decomposition; single re-sponsibility; appropriate abstraction. • Cross-File Coordination . Ensures consis-tency and correct interaction across multiple files, modules, and dependencies. - 0-1 score: Cross-file coordination largely missing or incorrect. - 2-3 score: Minimal cross-file awareness; re-lated code in other files ignored. - 4-5 score: Some cross-file changes made but several inconsistencies or leftovers. - 6-7 score: Core changes correct; some re-lated artifacts (unused helpers, stale imports) remain in other files. - 8-9 score: Nearly all cross-file impacts han-dled; one minor leftover. - 10 score: - 10: All smell-related code prop-erly addressed; no orphaned imports, dead helpers, or dangling references left behind. • Smell Elimination . Removes code smells such as duplication, unnecessary complexity, and fragile patterns to improve maintainabil-ity. - 0-1 score: Smell not addressed or new smell introduced. - 2-3 score: Minimal effort; smell barely ad-dressed. - 4-5 score: Only the most obvious smell loca-tion fixed; secondary artifacts untouched. - 6-7 score: Core smell addressed but some related artifacts (unused helpers, stale regis-trations) left behind. - 8-9 score: Smell substantially eliminated; only minor traces remain. - 10 score: Smell fully eliminated; no resid-ual smell code, unused imports, or orphaned helpers remain. 

G Examples 

This section presents concrete examples to illus-trate how the same smell type differs across diffi-culty levels. We use the dead code elimination task from the Click project as an example. As shown in Figure 9, the easy-level task only involves modifi-cations to two files and introduces one new func-tion, _check_command_alias_conflict , where the dead code appears as an unreachable condi-tional branch resolved_name is not None . Fig-ure 10 demonstrates that the medium-level task involves three files, with significantly higher com-plexity than the easy level. Figure 11 shows that the hard-level task involves four files and intro-duces the decorator _command_resolver , further increasing the concealment of the dead code. 

H Prompt Design 

Below are the prompt templates in our pipelines. 1. Smell Specification 

2. Calling Chain Overview 

. . . 

if cmd is not None and cmd_name != original_cmd_name :

alt_cmd = self. get_command (ctx , original_cmd_name )

if alt_cmd is not None and alt_cmd is not cmd :

resolved_name = _check_command_alias_conflict (

cmd_name , original_cmd_name , self.list_commands (ctx )

)

if resolved_name is not None :

cmd_name = resolved_name 

cmd = self. get_command (ctx , resolved_name )

. . . 

“instance_id ”: “"click -dead_code_elimination -e14f8e46a5034178a0872e65de70d4c9”, 

“smell_function ”: [ src /click/core.py , Group , resolve_command ], 

“difficulty”: “easy”, 

“type”: “ dead_code ”, 

. . . 

def _check_command_alias_conflict (

normalized_name : str, 

original_name : str, 

available_commands : cabc.Sequence [str], 

): 

posix_normalized = _posixify (normalized_name )

posix_original = _posixify (original_name )

if posix_normalized == posix_original :

return make_str (normalized_name )

for listed_name in available_commands :

listed_posix = _posixfy (listed_name )

if listed_posix == posix_normalized :

return normalized_name 

if listed_posix == posix_original :

return original_name 

return None 

Case Study: Easy Dead Code in Click 

File: src/ click /core.py  File: src/ click /utils.py Figure 9: Easy Dead Code Elimination in Click. Case Study: Medium Dead Code in Click 

1. Smell Specification 

2. Calling Chain Overview 

. . . 

if resolution_mode is None :

resolution = _RESOLUTION_MODE 

. . . 

policy: _ContextResolutionPolicy | None = None 

if resolution_mode is not ResolutionMode.STANDARD :

policy = _ContextResolutionPolicy (resolution_mode )

. . . 

if policy is not None :

policy. enter_content (ctx )

. . . 

return _validator_context_resolution (ctx , policy, args )

“instance_id ”: “click -dead_code_elimination -7a8e2a494a7aea9c10ale1d4f3990546”, 

“smell_function ”: [ src /click/shell_completion.py , null , resolve_context ], 

“difficulty”: “medium”, 

“type”: “ dead_code ”, 

. . . 

File: src/ click /globals.py 

def _validate_context_resolution (

ctx : Context, 

policy: _ ContextResolutionPolicy | None ,

args : list[str], 

): 

if policy is None :

return ctx 

if not policy.requires_validation :

return ctx 

return policy. validate_resolved (ctx )

class _ContextResolutionPolicy :

. . . 

def enter_context (self, ctx : Context): 

. . . 

def validate_resolved (self, ctx : Context): 

. . . 

return ctx 

class ResolutionMode (enum .Enum ): 

STANDARD = “ standard ”

VALIDATED = “ validated ”

STRICT =  “strict ”

File: src/ click /shell_completion.py 

File: src/ click /core.py 

File: src/ click /core.py 

File: src/ click /_utils.py 

Figure 10: Medium Dead Code Elimination in Click. Case Study: Hard Dead Code in Click 

1. Smell Specification 

2. Calling Chain Overview 

resolvers = _command_resolver.get_resolvers (_ command_resolver.active_mode )

. . . 

if resolvers: 

metadata = get_resolution_metadata () 

for resolver in resolvers: 

resolved_name , resolved_cmd = resolver (

cmd_name , self, ctx , metadata 

)

if resolved_cmd is not None :

return resolved_name , resolved_cmd , args [1:] 

. . . 

“instance_id ”: “click -dead_code_elimination -721e7057ad4d0e4.aa420e921a264e9f1”, 

“smell_function ”: [ src /click/core.py , Group , resolve_command ], 

“difficulty”: “hard”, 

“type”: “ dead_code ”, 

. . . 

@_command_resolver.register(“ extended ”, priority=10) 

def _extended_prefix_resolver (

cmd_name : str, 

. . . 

): 

. . . 

return None , None 

@_command_resolver.register(“ standard ”, priority=10) 

def _standard_passthrough_resolver (

cmd_name : str, 

. . . 

): 

. . . 

return None , None 

class _ResolutionStrategy :

. . . 

def get_resolvers (self, mode: str): 

entries = self._ strategies. get (mode, []) 

return [fn for _, fn in entries] 

. . . 

def get_resolution_metadata (): 

ctx = get_current_context (silent= True )

metadata = {“ has_context ”: ctx is not None }

if ctx is not None :

. . . 

return metadata 

File: src/ click /core.py 

File: src/ click /_utils.py 

File: src/ click /globals.py 

File: src/ click /util.py Figure 11: Hard Dead Code Elimination in Click. Prompt for Candidate Discovery 

You are a code analysis expert. Your task is to find methods/classes where it would be **convenient to inject** a specific code smell — NOT to find places that already exhibit this smell. The goal is to identify code locations where the structure, complexity, and cross-module relationships make it natural and easy to introduce the smell while keeping the code compilable and tests passing. ## Source path: ‘[SRC_PATH]‘ ## Eligible files: [ELIGIBLE_FILES] ## Smell type to inject: [SMELL_SPECIFICATION] ## Strategy Do NOT read every file. Instead: 1. Based on file names and module structure, pick the 3-5 most promising files 2. Use ‘grep‘ to quickly locate class definitions, large methods, and cross-module interactions 3. Only read specific sections of files (use line ranges) to verify candidates 4. Prioritize files with core business logic (e.g., core.py, models.py, engine.py) over peripherals ## Requirements Find exactly 5 candidates. Each candidate should be a method/class where injecting ‘[SMELL_TYPE]‘ would be **easy and natural** — meaning the surrounding code structure supports the injection without breaking functionality. Each candidate needs: - ‘file‘: relative path from repo root - ‘class_name‘: class name (null if standalone function) - ‘method_name‘: method/function name (for god_classes/interface_segregation, can be null) - ‘line_number‘: the actual starting line number (verify by reading) - ‘reason‘: 1-2 sentences explaining why this location is a good **injection point** (what structural properties make it easy to introduce the smell here) **IMPORTANT**: At most 2 candidates may come from the same file. Spread candi-dates across different files to ensure diversity. **DIVERSITY REQUIREMENT**: The 5 candidates must be substantially different from each other: - They should involve different classes/functions with different responsibilities - They should target different code patterns or architectural concerns - Avoid picking multiple methods from the same class or methods that do similar things ## Output After finding all candidates, output a single JSON block:          

> {"[ SMELL_TYPE ]": [{" file ": " ..." , " class_name ": "..." , " method_name ": "..." , " line_number ": 123 , " reason ": "..."} ]}

The key must be exactly: [SMELL_TYPE] It must have exactly 5 entries. 

> Figure 12: Candidate discovery prompt illustrating the discovery process.

## Prompt for Smell Injection 

You are a senior software engineer specializing in code transformation and refactoring benchmarks. Your task is NOT to improve the code. Instead, you must inject a specific type of code smell into the given codebase. ### Objective Inject the following code smell: [SMELL_TYPE] into the target location: [PROJECT_PATH] ### Target Candidate You MUST inject the smell starting from the following candidate: [CANDIDATE PATH] ### Difficulty Level: [DIFFICULTY] [DIFFICULTY_DESC] ### Constraints [Constraints Details] ### Output Requirements After generating the modified codebase, you MUST append a JSON object at the very end of your response. Format:             

> {" smell_type ": " Type name ", " hint_targeted ": " ..." , " hint_guided ": " ..." , " smell_function ": [" absolute / path / to / file . java " , " ClassName " , " methodName "], " test_functions ": [[" absolute / path / to / file . java " , " ClassName " , " methodName "], [" absolute / path / to / other . java " , " ClassName " , " methodName "] ]}

### smell_function rules [Smell Function DESC] ### test_functions rules [TEST FUNCTION DESC] 

Figure 13: Prompt for Smell Inject, which is the main component of our construction pipeline. Prompt for Fixing Errors 

You previously injected a "[SMELL_TYPE]" code smell into this codebase. The changes you made caused the following unit tests to FAIL. **CRITICAL**: Your task is to fix the TESTS, NOT to remove the smell! **Your task**: Fix the code so that all tests pass while **KEEPING the injected code smell intact**. - The smell must still be present and non-trivial after your fix - You are fixing **test failures caused by your injection**, NOT refactoring the smell away - Think of it as: "make my smell injection more robust so it doesn’t break tests" **DO NOT**: - Remove or refactor the smell you injected - "Clean up" the code smell - Make the code better quality — keep the smell as is **DO**: - Fix any syntax errors, import errors, or runtime errors - Adjust test-related code if needed - Make minimal changes to pass tests while preserving the smell pattern Do NOT run any tests yourself — testing is handled externally. ## Diff of your previous changes [SMELL_CONTENT] ## Failing test scripts [TEST_SCRIPTS] ## Test error output [TEST_ERROR_OUTPUT] ## Requirements 1. **Fix the failing tests while preserving the code smell injection** — the smell pattern must remain 2. The code must compile/run correctly 3. **DO NOT remove or refactor the smell** — you are fixing test failures, not improving code quality 4. DO NOT create new files 5. DO NOT run any test commands (pytest, unittest, etc.) 6. Make **minimal changes** — only fix what’s broken, keep the smell as you originally injected it After making your fixes, output the same JSON format as before:             

> {" smell_type ": " Type name ", " hint_targeted ": " ..." , " hint_guided ": " ..." , " smell_function ": [" absolute / path / to / file " , " ClassName " , " methodName "], " test_functions ": [[" absolute / path / to / file " , " ClassName " , " methodName "], [" absolute / path / to / other " , " ClassName " , " methodName "] ]}

Figure 14: Prompt for fixing errors from Quality Validation module . Prompt for Smell Analysis 

You are an expert software engineer analyzing a code change (diff) that introduces a "smell_type" code smell into a codebase. ## Smell Type - **Name**: smell_type - **Description**: smell_description ## The Smell Diff This diff was applied to a clean codebase to introduce the smell: [smell_diff] ## Your Task Analyze this diff by going through each change and assessing its significance. Focus on **what each change means and how important it is**, NOT on how to fix it. For each distinct change in the diff (a new function, a moved block, an added import, etc.), explain: - **What it does** - **How significant it is** (critical / moderate / minor) to the smell - **What it degrades** in the codebase (e.g., coupling, cohesion, readability, API surface, etc.) After covering individual changes, provide: 1. **Overall smell pattern**: Summarize how these changes work together to create the "smell_type" smell. What design principle is violated? 2. **Severity ranking**: Rank the changes from most to least important. Which changes are the **root cause** of the smell, and which are just supporting noise? 3. **What was degraded overall**: What concrete qualities of the codebase were harmed? Be specific about the impact on maintainability, coupling, cohesion, etc. 4. **Key evaluation signals**: When judging whether a candidate fix truly addresses this smell, what should matter most? What would distinguish a thorough fix from a superficial one? ## Output Format Return your result using XML tags. Do NOT wrap the output in a code block. <analysis> Your full analysis text as described above. Write freely — no escaping needed. </analysis> 

> Figure 15: Prompt for smell analysis to produce detailed information to facilitate comprehensive evaluation.

## Example Output for Smell Analysis 

### Change 1: Storing ‘_last_state‘ in ‘_OptionParser‘ (parser.py) **What it does**: Adds a single line ‘self._last_state = state‘ to persist the parsing state object after parsing completes. This exposes internal parsing state that was previously encapsulated within the parse method. **Significance**: CRITICAL - This is the enabling infrastructure change that makes the feature envy possible. Without this, the Command class couldn’t access the parser’s internal state. **What it degrades**: - **Encapsulation**: Breaks the parser’s encapsulation by exposing internal state (‘_ParsingState‘) that should remain private - **API surface**: Implicitly expands the parser’s interface by making ‘_last_state‘ a queryable attribute - **Coupling**: Creates a temporal coupling - the ‘_last_state‘ is only valid after pars-ing, but there’s no contract enforcing this ... 

> Figure 16: Example output of smell analysis used in LLM-as-Judge.

## Prompt for Task Instruction 

You are an expert Python refactoring assistant. ## Task [guided or targeted instruction] ### Instructions 1. Read and understand the relevant code in the project. 2. Identify the code smell and understand why it is problematic. 3. Refactor the code to eliminate the smell while preserving all existing behavior. 4. Ensure all tests continue to pass after your changes. ### Constraints - Do not change the original program behavior. - Preserve the original control flow, inputs, and outputs. ### IMPORTANT You are allowed to perform any operations, such as checking or modifying related files, without prior approval from me. ### Response 

> Figure 17: Task instruction prompt provided to the refactoring agent.

## Prompt for LLM-as-Judge 

You are an expert code reviewer evaluating a refactored version of code that originally contained a "[smell_type]" code smell. ## Context - **Smell Type**: [smell_type] - **Smell Description**: [description] [smell_analysis] **IMPORTANT**: The refactoring below is provided in **unified diff format** (git diff output). Lines starting with ‘-‘ are removed, lines starting with ‘+‘ are added, and context lines are unchanged. Evaluate the *intent and quality of the changes*, not the completeness of the code shown — diffs only show changed regions, not the full files. ### Refactoring (diff fixing the smell) [refactored_code] ## Evaluation Rubric [general_dimensions] Return your evaluation as JSON:                     

> {" smell_elimination ": {" score ": 0 , " justification ": " brief explanation " }, " cross_file_coordination ": {" score ": 0 , " justification ": " brief explanation " }, " structural_soundness ": {" score ": 0 , " justification ": " brief explanation " }, " code_quality ": {" score ": 0 , " justification ": " brief explanation " }, " summary ": " 2 -3 sentence overall assessment " }

Figure 18: Judging Prompt for LLM to evaluate the refactoring result of agents.