Title: Interference-Aware Cross-Application Placement: A Multi-Objective Optimization Approach for Microservice Clusters

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.25922v1

Published Time: Thu, 25 Jun 2026 01:08:11 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
# Interference-Aware Cross-Application Placement: A Multi-Objective Optimization Approach for Microservice Clusters 

1st Iqra Zafar 

Hasso Plattner Institute 

Potsdam, Germany iqra.zafar@hpi.de 

2nd Christian Medeiros Adriano 

Hasso Plattner Institute 

Potsdam, Germany christian.adriano@hpi.de 

3rd Holger Giese 

Hasso Plattner Institute 

Potsdam, Germany holger.giese@hpi.de 

Abstract —In modern cloud architectures, multiple applications often run within the same clustered environment, sharing un-derlying resources. This resource sharing can cause interference among applications, leading to degraded latency and reduced system stability. As containerized microservices become increas-ingly central to cloud-native applications, their performance can suffer from complex interference scenarios related to resource competition. Meanwhile, most existing microservice approaches address interference either by detecting and localizing perfor-mance issues or by optimizing latency alone, without explaining why specific co-locations cause cross-application interference, and how this can inform service placement optimization. This work closes that gap by building a spatio-temporal data structure that captures the causal effects of cross-application interference. These causal effects are mathematically formalized as necessary and sufficient conditional probabilities that inform a multi-objective optimizer (Optuna). Cross-application profiling is used to simulate traces and estimate interference probabilities, while per-service latency baselines are provided by performance data, such as 95th-percentile response times (p95). Our approach sup-ports network penalties, application isolation requirements, and adjustable weighting of necessary and sufficient causal metrics. Experimental results on real multi-application workloads show that interference-aware placements significantly reduce cross-application interference and improve response performance. Ultimately, the causality-driven multi-objective formulation gives cloud operators explicit control over interference, latency, and communication overhead when configuring service placements. 

Index Terms —Microservices, Multi-Node Cluster, Service Placement, Self-Adaptation, Optimization, Causality 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Microservices have become the foundation of scalable cloud-native systems (e.g., in Kubernetes and serverless en-vironments) [1]. A monolithic program may be divided into smaller, independently deployable, and scalable services, i.e., microservices. Despite its adaptability, this architecture ex-hibits unpredictable performance due to co-location inter-ference (Definition 1.1) over shared resources. Inadequate service placement can cause latency to rise, response times to deteriorate, or even breach of SLAs and SLOs targets. Service interference is a common cause of performance degradation in current cloud-native environments, often leading to latency spikes, dropped requests, or reduced throughput [2], [3]. Co-located microservices competing for constrained CPU, mem-ory, or I/O bandwidth on shared nodes are usually the source of this interference. 

Definition 1.1: Interference happens when two services that have no logical dependency (caller-callee relation) but compete for the same resource (compute, memory, I/O) to the extent that they affect each other’s performance (e.g., throughput, latency) [4]. Traditional placement techniques lack the foresight to proac-tively prevent such interference, as they often rely on reac-tive [5]–[7] or static/periodic optimization [8]. The reliance on purely correlational information and static rules hinders current approaches’ ability to identify the origin of cross-application interference and the direction of its effects, given the complex propagation of performance anomalies. To move beyond reacting to performance breaches after they occur and searching for elusive sources across multiple applications, we propose capturing causal-effect associations and pathways that are not typically visible in microservice call graphs (i.e., service meshes). 

Research Questions:  

> •

RQ.1 (Severity of phenomenon) : What is the magnitude of the cross-application interference? - Magnitude con-sists of the number of nodes and the level of performance degradation, which determines the phenomenon severity and consequently, the specific needs for mitigation, e.g., which nodes and the extent of interference reduction.  

> •

RQ.2 (Effectiveness) : Is our service placement approach able to reduce interference across scenarios of increasing complexity (number of nodes affected)? - This question evaluates the effectiveness of the approach in recovering the microservice systems from degradation, while also providing insights into the scope of adaptations, i.e., the number of impacted nodes and residual interference (unmitigated). For instance, are there trade-offs between the residual interference and impacted nodes?  

> •

RQ.3 (Component contribution) : What is the impact of each component of the approach on the effectiveness of placement? - The components of the approach consist of 

> arXiv:2606.25922v1 [cs.DC] 24 Jun 2026

two elements of causal knowledge that will be introduced later. 

Our contribution: This paper presents a novel approach to microservice placement optimization by integrating formal causal reasoning with continuous adaptation within an of-fline feedback loop extension of the MAPE-K architectural pattern [9]. The main contributions are as follows: (1) Acausality-aware microservice placement framework – We propose an adaptive placement approach based on Spatio-Temporal Interference Graphs (STIGs) from our prior work [10]. The framework uses Probability of Sufficiency (PS), Probability of Necessity and Sufficiency (PNS), and Prob-ability of Necessity (PN) to identify, explain, and mitigate interference among co-located services. By grounding these metrics in formal notions of necessity and sufficiency, the approach improves both the precision and interpretability of placement decisions. (2) Runtime-aware adaptation within an offline MAPE-K loop – We integrate Prometheus and Istio to continuously collect traces, service- and system-level metrics, including response time, CPU/memory usage, latency, and error rates. These observations feed the Monitor and Analyze phases of the MAPE-K loop, enabling the system to detect SLO violations and performance anomalies, re-evaluate current placements through the STIG model, and respond to changing workload conditions. (3) A multi-objective adaptive planner for scalable placement optimization – We develop an Optuna-based planner that jointly optimizes service re-sponsiveness and interference reduction. To keep the search efficient and focused, the planner prioritizes services using PN-and PS-based rankings, progressively expands the placement search space, and incorporates SLO-aware service importance during optimization. (4) A comprehensive evaluation on representative microservice benchmarks – We evaluate the proposed approach on Tea-Store, BookInfo, and Sock-Shop across diverse runtime scenarios, including failure conditions, traffic surges, and geo-distributed deployments. The results show that the approach consistently reduces interference, im-proves response performance, and adapts placement strategies in response to observed system dynamics. Finally, all data and scripts are publicly available 1.

Tour - Section II details the preliminaries, Section III the state-of-the-art, Section IV the service placement approach, Section V the evaluation, while implications and threats to validity are in Section VI and we conclude with Section VII. II. P RELIMINARIES 

A. Contention and Interference 

Contention refers to the pressure a service exerts on a shared resource (e.g., CPU, memory, I/O bandwidth) when multiple services attempt to access it simultaneously [11]. High contention arises when demand for a resource approaches or exceeds its available capacity. This leads to performance 

> 1Reproducibility package: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.18900711

degradation, e.g., increased latency or response time. In mi-croservice systems, contention is a key driver of interference, as two services without logical dependencies (no caller–callee relation) may still negatively impact their performance when they contend for the same underlying resource [2]. 

Interference arises when resource competition and degrade microservice performance [5]. We capture cross-application interference using a dynamic data structure (Definition 2.1), where dependencies between microservices are measured as correlations observed during concurrent executions. For more details about how STIGs are being generated from the system’s knowledge graph, refer to our prior work [10]. 

Definition 2.1: Spatio-Temporal Interference Graph (STIG ) is denoted as G = ( V, E, X v(t), X e(t)), where V are nodes representing services, E are directed edges representing interference between services across applications, Xv(t) are the time-varying node features (e.g., resource per service), and 

Xe(t) the edge features (e.g., interference probability). 

B. Causality in STIG 

Microservice interference is inherently a causal phe-nomenon, where the resource consumption of one service af-fects the performance of other services. However, correlations in execution traces do not imply causation. To remediate that, we rely on causal reasoning about interference represented in STIGs and we adopt the counterfactual notions 2 of sufficiency 

and necessity from Pearl [13] and Halpern & Hitchcock [14]. 

Definition 2.2: Causal Sufficiency in STIGs A cause is sufficient for an effect if its occurrence alone guarantees the effect. Within a STIG, this corresponds to an interference edge e ∈ E, where the source service’s consumption always induces a performance degradation in the target service. A high-probability edge weight (close to 1.0) in an STIG can be interpreted as approaching sufficiency, meaning that whenever the source service experiences contention, the target service is consistently affected by interference. An example is when a service A interferes with service B with probability 1.0. This reflects a condition of near-sufficiency, because the simulta-neous execution of service A causally induces a slowdown in service B. Probability of sufficiency is defined in Equation (1). 

PS( X → Y ) = 



PNS( X → Y )1 − P (Y | ¬ X) , P (Y | ¬ X) < 1,

0, otherwise ,

(1) 

Definition 2.3: Causal Necessity in STIGs A cause is nec-essary for an effect if the effect cannot occur in its absence. In STIG terms, this implies that interference observed at a target service node cannot be explained without a particular source node being active in the graph. Necessity can be assessed by analyzing minimal cut-sets or exclusive dependency paths in the STIG [15], [16]. If removing a given source node (or its edges) eliminates all interference paths leading to a target, that source is necessary. The obvious case is when Service A is 

> 2For a formal analysis of 12 definitions of sufficiency and necessity, their use cases, and implications, please refer to Becker [12].

the only origin of interference paths leading to Service B,then A’s contention is necessary for B’s slowdown. Pearl’s probability of necessity is defined in Equation (2). 

PN( X → Y ) = 



PNS( X → Y )

P (Y | X) , P (Y | X) > 0,

0, otherwise (2) 

Interplay of Sufficiency and Necessity – Because of the large number of interdependencies in multi-tenant systems, we expect few interference relations are both necessary and sufficient. Sufficiency as a probability, it strongly increases the likelihood of interference, even though it does not guarantee it in every case. Necessity is distributed, because it is part of a set of causes connected by conjunctions, i.e., all must be present to cause an interference. In our formulation, we map sufficiency to edge weights and necessity to graph connectivity properties. This way the STIG can provide a causal lens for inferring direction in the correlations computed from execution traces and enable the identification of the interference propagation path across the microservice deployment. The probability of necessity and sufficiency is then computed as in Equation (3). 

PNS( X → Y ) = max  0, P (Y | X) − P (Y | ¬ X) (3) 

C. MAPE-K as the Control Framework 

Our system is designed around the MAPE-K (Moni-tor–Analyze–Plan–Execute over Knowledge) loop, a popular autonomic control architecture to allow self-adaptive behavior in microservice-based cloud settings [9]. This loop is offline, meaning it is not embedded or running continuously at runtime within the cloud system. The goal of MAPE-K is to system-atically close the feedback loop between dynamic decision-making and system observation. For practical examples of how the MAPE-K can be applied to causal-based analysis and planning, please refer to our previous work [3], [17]. III. S TATE -OF -THE -A RT 

In software architecture, many approaches apply multi-optimization models to improve system performance [18], inclusive distributed architectures. Concerning adaption of microservices, most state-of-the-art focus on detection-centric [19] and correlation-driven [20] to surface latency symptoms (p95/p99) and localize ”likely” culprits along a trace graph. However, these approaches often overlook why aconfiguration produces interference and how to adjust place-ment under competing objectives, such as increasing response time or mitigating interference. 

Interference-aware placement has been addressed by iPlace [2], [5], which clusters microservices to minimize inter-ference and reduce the number of servers while still meeting performance targets. IRENE [6] targets edge environments and uses a genetic algorithm to jointly optimize high availability and contention-induced performance interference for microser-vice applications. Community- and priority-based microser-vice placement [8] models dependencies as a graph and incor-porates long-term interference awareness into the placement optimization problem. At production scale, C-Koordinator [7] extends Kubernetes/Koordinator with CPI-based prediction models to detect and mitigate interference in co-located mi-croservice clusters, improving response-time metrics across. 

Optimal placement of microservices has been investi-gated in various methods. Particle Swarm Optimization-based microservice placement [21] allocates microservices in cloud-native infrastructures, including a Sock Shop case study that demonstrates improved resource utilization and SLA com-pliance. Multi-objective reconfiguration of real-time microser-vices [22] applies an energy-based nuclear reaction optimiza-tion meta-heuristic to adapt microservice deployments to mul-tiple objectives, including timing and resource constraints. An Optuna-based [23] multi-objective optimization was adopted to fine-tune edge service placement and related parameters to minimize both latency and deployment cost for location-based services in mobile edge computing environments [24]. 

Causal latency modeling for microservices employs causal discovery and domain knowledge methods to build latency graphs that explain SLO violations and support prediction and diagnosis [25]. CAR-PT and related causal performance test-ing approaches employ causal reasoning to generate workloads that are more likely to expose performance issues, linking causal graphs with performance-critical test inputs [26]. De-tecting causal structure on cloud applications with Granger causality infers dependency graphs among microservices from logs and traces, providing causal structures that can comple-ment or motivate representations such as STIGs [27]. A re-cent survey of causal-inference-based RCA for microservices evaluates multiple causal discovery and reasoning techniques on benchmark datasets, and positions causal graphs as afoundation for moving from root-cause localization toward broader decision problems such as placement [28]. 

Methodological challenges – (i) Causality vs. correlation: since counterfactuals (for example, “what if these two services were not co-located?”) are typically missing [19], [25], [29], [30], necessity and sufficiency remain indistinct, and methods overfit observed traces. (ii) Actuation granularity: although placement is a key trigger for interference, placement-aware actions (affinity/anti-affinity, node isolation) are seldom ex-plored; remediation usually relies on auto-scaling, restarting, or circuit breaking [31]. (iii) Single-objective bias: many approaches optimize tail delay only and do not quantify the trade-off surface or weight interference reduction against response time or throughput [32]. (iv) Blind spots in evalua-tion: studies often under-stress behavioral complexity (spikes, node failures, location changes) and rarely separate it from structural complexity (graph size or density), while favoring steady-state traffic and small homogeneous topologies [33]. (v) Observability limitations: sensitivity to incomplete knowledge is rarely assessed; trace sampling, head/tail bias, and partial coverage are common, and few systems maintain a persis-tent knowledge base for design-time evaluation or reuse of placements [34], [35]; finally, misreported overheads of online inference and continuous tracing reduce external validity and repeatability [36]. Our contribution is to bridge the detection-to-placement decision that is informed by causal knowledge and, hence, more robust to hidden changes in the architecture. IV. A PPROACH 

A. System Architecture & Methodology 

Figure 1 shows the proposed self-adaptive loop, which follows the offline MAPE-K pattern. The managed element is a multi-tenant microservice application on Kubernetes. The controller detects interference between co-located services and proactively reconfigures their placement to improve perfor-mance and fault tolerance without human intervention. In the Monitor phase , the system continuously collects runtime data: request traces, response-time statistics (for ex-ample p95 latency per service), resource usage (CPU, memory, I/O), deployment state (service replica to node mapping), and cross-application interactions. These metrics and traces are normalised and stored in the knowledge base as time-stamped events and call graphs. In the Analyze phase , the STIG simulator derives inter-ference knowledge from these observations. It builds STIG graphs that capture which services interfere when co-located in a same cluster sharing same host/server, and estimates causal measures (PN, PS, PNS) for each service pair. Combining these with STIG edge weights yields an expected interference score per pair. The analyzer then correlates these scores with response-time degradation to identify interference-prone services, producing STIGs, causal estimates, and per-service interference sensitivity indicators. In the Plan phase , the controller computes a placement strategy. It aggregates pairwise interference scores into a per-service priority ranking, then defines a search space of alter-native placements for the most interference-sensitive services. An Optuna-based multi-objective optimizer used, evaluating each candidate placement by total expected interference and response-time cost (p95 latency plus penalties for cross-node communication on critical edges). From the resulting Pareto front, the planner selects a configuration that matches current operator preferences and forwards it to Execute. In the Execute phase , the system enacts the selected place-ment by updating Kubernetes scheduling constraints (i.e. node selectors) and allowing the orchestrator to migrate pods. It may move only high-priority services or rebalance all services. Monitoring then continues under live workload, allowing direct observation of the impact on latency, throughput, and interference indicators. The shared Knowledge base stores deployment graphs, STIGs, causal interference estimates, service rankings, and outcomes of past reconfigurations (for example, “separating A from B reduced interference by X but increased latency by Y ms”). This history enables continuous refinement. The Analyze 

phase updates interference models. The Plan phase favours successful patterns, while the Execute collects further traces for future analysis. Over time, the MAPE-K loop evolves from purely reactive control to experience-driven, interference-aware placement in a multi-node cluster. 

> Fig. 1. STIG-based MAPE-K loop with interference-aware service placement.

B. Algorithm 

Our research utilizes two algorithms, Algorithm 1 is used to compute causal probabilities values (PN,PS,PNS) from collected traces across multi-node cluster.The algorithm starts by loading the cleaned trace dataset D from CSV (line 1). For each span, it parses the start time into a timestamp ts (line -2), converts the duration into seconds, and computes the end time 

te = ts + duration (line 3). For each service s, it computes the mean μs and standard deviation σs of span durations (line 4), and defines a service-specific anomaly threshold (line 5). A span is marked anomalous if it reports an error or if its duration exceeds τs (line 6), forming the anomalous set Da (line 7). The algorithm then counts anomalous spans per service and retains only services with at least M anomalies to reduce noise (line 8). For each remaining service, anomalous spans are sorted by start time and stored as aligned arrays {txs } and 

{txe } (line 9). The output table T is initialized next (line 10). The function TemporalHits (lines 11-17) iterates over all events of service X (line 13), constructs a temporal window 

[txs , t xe +∆ t] for each event (line 14), and increments a counter whenever a Y -event start time falls inside this window (lines 15-16), returning the hit count h.The function IndependentFrac (lines 18-27) returns 0

if service Y has no anomalous events (line 19). Otherwise, it iterates over all Y -events (line 21), checks whether each event is covered by any X-window (lines 22-25), and counts uncovered events (line 26). It returns the uncovered fraction 

u/ |{ tys }| (line 27), i.e., an empirical estimate of P (Y | ¬ X).The main loop iterates over all ordered service pairs (X, Y )

with X̸ = Y (line 28). Pairs belonging to the same application are skipped using AppOf( X) = AppOf( Y ) (lines 29–31). The anomalous time arrays {txs , t xe , t ys , t ye } are extracted from 

Da (line 32). If either service has no anomalous events, the pair is skipped (lines 33–35). The total number of anomalous events of X, NX , is then computed (line 36), followed by the hit count h using TemporalHits (line 37). The conditional probabilities(line 38-43) are estimated based on formulation explained in section Finally, the algorithm appends as a row in table T (line 44). After all service pairs are processed, the completed table T is returned (line 46). The allocation of microservices across worker nodes under a multi-objective optimization approach is formalized in Al-gorithm 2. It starts by importing all input data collected during load test, probability values generated by the method explained inAlgorithm 1, Interference graphs(STIGs) generated by STIG simulator. It parses response time logs and computes a robust latency for each service using the median of p95 values (line 1). It then processes the PNS table, mapping each (X, Y) relation to canonical service keys for consistency across all artifacts (line 2). All STIG graphs are loaded and their interference weights aggregated, yielding one STIG based contention value per service pair (line 3). The global service set is built as the union of services appearing in logs, the PNS table, and the STIG (line 4). For each service pair present in both the causal table and STIG graphs, the algorithm computes a causal strength α(s, t ) from PN, PS, and PNS (lines 5-7). Expected interference E(s,t) is then defined as α(s, t ) times the STIG weight, capturing causal-topological co-location cost (line 8). In parallel, a communication edge set is built for all service pairs that exchange requests, to account for cross-node penalties (Line 9). Each service receives a priority score obtained by summing all incoming and outgoing E(s,t), iden-tifying the most placement-critical services (lines 10-12). A multi-objective Optuna study is created, and each trial samples a candidate node placement for all services (lines 13-27). For each trial, total interference is computed by summing E(s,t) over co-located pairs, while latency is adjusted with penalties for cross-node communication. After all trials, Pareto-optimal placements are extracted, one is selected (preferring lower interference), and the algorithm returns the chosen placement, its objectives, and the priority scores (lines 28-30). V. E VALUATION 

A. Experimental Setup 

Testbed Infrastructure – In our in-house developed testbed, all experiments ran on a single Ubuntu VM (can add more VMs as per complexity of architecture), provisioned with 32 vCPUs, 50 GiB RAM, and 200 GiB SSD storage. We deployed a Kind Kubernetes cluster with one control plane node and two worker nodes. We deploy three microservice applications (Sock-Shop 3, TeaStore 4, and Bookinfo 5) across various Kubernetes namespaces. Three HTTPRoutes (/sock, /tea, /book) received traffic that was entered over an Istio Gateway (Gateway API). Every application namespace had sidecar injection enabled. There was no inter-VM traffic since the cluster was using the default type CNI. Prometheus (scrape interval: 15s) gathered metrics and surfaced them in Kiali. Jaeger (all-in-one) collected distributed traces using an Istio Telemetry resource that allowed tracing. Logs were recorded using the stdout/stderr container. A detailed knowledge graph 

> 3SockShop: https://microservices-demo.github.io/
> 4Tea-Store: https://github.com/DaGeRe/TeaStore
> 5Bookinfo: https://istio.io/latest/docs/examples/bookinfo/

(Figure 2) shows three deployed shop applications on a cluster.  

> Fig. 2. knowledge graph

Reproducibility – To create the type cluster, deploy Istio, and execute all experiments, we offer k6 scripts, Kubernetes manifests (Namespaces, Gateway/HTTPRoutes, Destination-Rules), and a run script 6. Each run used a different set of random seeds and scenario ordering. To demonstrate the resilience of our proposed method and its benefits over several state-of-the-art approaches, we carry out intensive experiments. Our collected datasets consist of specific of incidents mentioned below, collected from multi node Kubernetes cluster. We created scenario-based tests that represent actual operational difficulties in a multi-node cluster where interference happened. The selected scenario describes adaptation goals commonly found in microservices applications. We quantify changes in system-level parameters, including error rate (service failure, ”req failed”), interference score, and reaction time, before and after adaptation in order to assess adaptation performance across all circumstances. 

Test Scenario – We simulated a surge in resource demand to mimic an abrupt jump in resource demand, similar to a flash sale or unanticipated traffic spike. As the load rises, we monitor how interference levels and response rates vary. This maps to our three research questions (RQ.1, RQ.2, RQ.3) and a set of specified metrics (Table I) computed (sampled) by the monitoring stack. Next we detail the directives we followed to simulate the surge scenario.  

> •

Generate traffic spike using k6, increasing CPU, memory, and request load across services.  

> •

Check whether the system can stop co-location when under stress.  

> •

Monitor response degradation and re-optimization fre-quency.  

> •

Analyze Optimizer stability and MAPE-K loop respon-siveness as system pressure rises. 

Metrics to Collect per Scenario – We collect met-rics (Table I) that characterize system behavior during each test. The optimizer logs planning-side signals (place-ment, interference score, response score, iteration, migration count, convergence time), while Prometheus/Istio provide run-time measures including end-to-end response time (RT), tail latency( Lp95 /Lp99 latency), error rate εt and node resource utilization. Response time is considered primary metric at macro level as it encompasses full end-to-end experience in               

> 6See cluster script at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.18900711 TABLE I MONITORING METRICS AND LOGS
> Metric Tool Purpose
> Response time Prometheus, Istio SLO violations, user expe-rience
> request duration
> (P95) Prometheus Latency degradation Placement logs (.json) Test script Service-to-node mapping SLO violations Prometheus, Istio, Jaeger Responsiveness Node utilization kubectl top node ,metrics-server Affected nodes

test scenario. We monitor, compare, and display response times across time, services, or nodes since they are continuous and timestamped. When assessing service placement under interference, it is a more accurate statistic since it directly correlates to user-perceived delay. Span duration is a sec-ondary metric at micro level which is a time required for a particular microservice or function to complete a trace. It is also important when we want to analyze service perfor-mance bottlenecks, also calculate the internal delay for each microservice (payment service vs. cart service in SockShop , for example) and examine breakdown of total time per com-ponent. We can measure any interference and its mitigation after re-deployment (RQ.1, RQ.2) and sensitivity to missing knowledge (RQ.3), by correlating these streams (SLO breach events → re-optimization latency → new placement → change in interference and latency). We can also demonstrate that the causal, STIG-guided planner maintains interference magnitude reduction across applications (RQ.1). 

B. Scenario Based Analysis 

Surge in resource demand – To examine how the multi-node cluster responds to sudden increases in resource demand, we use a load generator to send traffic through the Istio ingress and monitor the cluster’s behavior during spikes. We perform load tests at regular intervals. In each test run, we first establish a baseline using Kubernetes’ default placement for all microservices, then run a k6 workload while collecting distributed traces and performance metrics. These default-cluster multiple test run measure the extent of cross-service interference before any adaptive placement strategy is applied. Table II shows a clear performance imbalance among the services across the four test runs.                                  

> TABLE II DEFAULT CLUSTER (WITHOUT OPTIMIZATION )ACROSS MULTIPLE TEST RUNS ,P95 IN MILLISECONDS MS
> Run p95 (book) p95 (sock) p95 (tea) req failed (%)
> 110250 47.77 202.24 24.62 210340 47.71 177.11 24.75 310300 47.98 143.41 24.59 410290 47.93 143.96 24.57
> Mean 10295.00 47.85 166.68 24.63 Std 32.02 0.11 24.65 0.07

We collect traces after load test and analysis each trace, its start time, duration, latency and failure status. During the                                     

> TABLE III TOP SERVICES BY LATENCY (P50, 95, 99, M AX IN MILLISECONDS MS )
> Service Fail rate (%) P50 P95 P99 Max
> productpage.bookinfo 0.00 21.63 64.95 67.61 82.52 details.bookinfo 0.00 2.00 42.60 43.63 46.90 front-end.sock-shop 0.00 1.75 42.33 42.81 43.13 reviews.bookinfo 0.00 4.61 6.03 7.25 7.67 webui.teastore 50.00 2.37 3.49 4.16 9.63 ratings.bookinfo 0.00 0.86 1.07 1.18 1.26

test window, we collected 24000 spans. For example, in Test-1 (Table II), 5,940 spans were recorded, 414 of which were identified as error spans. Table III contains the latency results obtained on the collected trace. This workload produced an overall failure rate of 7%. Tail latency was analyzed using the 95th percentile (p95) to highlight services that struggle under peak load. The main hotspot is productpage.bookinfo. Details.bookinfo and front-end.sock-shop also show elevated p95 values. In contrast, reviews.bookinfo and ratings.bookinfo remain fast and stable (p95 = 6 ms and 1 ms). webui.teastore service is unusual, it has a very high error rate (approx. 50%) but low p95 latency (approx. 3–4 ms), indicating many quick failures (e.g., misrouting, unavailable backends, or quota issues) rather than slow responses. Overall, the data match the architecture. productpage service acts as a gateway and accumulates tail latency. Sock-Shop’s front-end shows milder stress, TeaStore appears misconfigured or under-provisioned. This span-level view identifies where to focus optimization such as scaling, timeout tuning, and resilience improvements. The broader goal is to detect interference anomalies when multiple shops run concurrently on the same cluster. Figure 3 shows the minute-level distribution of anomalies during Load Spike scenario across shops. The red dashed line marks the onset of the spike. Bookshop and TeaStore exhibit far more anomalies than Sock-Shop just after concurrent start-up. TeaStore is dominated by error-based anomalies (instability/failures under load), while Bookshop shows many duration-based anomalies (queuing and slowdown from resource contention). Anomalies gradually decline over time, consistent with cluster adaptation (e.g., throttling or queue stabilization). SockShop remains largely unaffected, suggesting lower resource demand or indirect isolation. These patterns support the hypothesis that co-located services under concurrent traffic experience interference, pro-ducing distinct anomaly profiles and revealing imbalanced resource contention on the shared infrastructure. Next, we process these traces to compute the causal inter-ference measures PN, PS, and PNS for all observed pairs of services (see Algorithm 1). 

Cluster Reconfiguration Plan – In the reconfiguration plan, the services are ranked according to their likelihood of causing the interference anomaly. Since interference occurs in both directions, the strategy may identify abnormal services on each side of an interference relationship as the source and the target. When an anomalous service interferes with services from other applications, our method ranks services by the Fig. 3. Interference Anomaly (Service Failure/Error) vs Request Duration TABLE IV CAUSAL INTERFERENCE PROBABILITIES BETWEEN SERVICES .                                     

> X (source) Y (target) PNS PN PS
> webui.teastore reviews.bookinfo 99.79 100.00 99.79 webui.teastore ratings.bookinfo 96.03 100.00 96.03 webui.teastore productpage.bookinfo 42.68 100.00 42.68 productpage.bookinfo webui.teastore 92.68 92.68 100.00 ratings.bookinfo webui.teastore 81.12 81.12 100.00 reviews.bookinfo webui.teastore 81.12 81.12 100.00 TABLE V OPTUNA SUGGESTED CONFIGURATION (B EST POSSIBLE )
> Service Default placement Optimized placement
> productpage.bookinfo kind-cluster-worker2 kind-cluster-worker1 ratings.bookinfo kind-cluster-worker1 kind-cluster-worker2 reviews.bookinfo kind-cluster-worker1 kind-cluster-worker2 front-end.sock-shop kind-cluster-worker1 kind-cluster-worker2 webui.teastore kind-cluster-worker1 kind-cluster-worker1

likelihood that they are necessary and sufficient, explained in Section II-B. We derived the probabilities displayed in Table IV after applying these formulas to the interference anomaly data. 

Service Placement – The placement strategy, explained in Section IV-B, jointly considers cross-application service in-terference and deployment-induced latency. Based on STIG interference weights and causal PN/PS/PNS estimates, the optimiser explores placements that minimise expected in-terference while constraining communication overhead. The resulting configurations indicate which services should be co-located and which should be separated across nodes to re-duce contention, thereby guiding reconfiguration decisions that enhance performance stability in multi-tenant deployments. Table V shows a comparison between default and best possible placement setting suggested by Optuna. For instance, under certain workload, the Optuna-based op-timizer identifies webui.teastore and productpage.bookinfo as the most interference-sensitive services, followed by the front-end and two additional Bookinfo backend services. Using these priorities together with the learned interference matrix, it places Teastore’s web UI alongside a small group of low- 

> Fig. 4. Trade-off between total expected interference and total latency

priority services on kind-cluster-worker1, while placing most Bookinfo and Sock-shop services on kind-cluster-worker2. This placement cleanly separates all highly interfering service pairs, achieving a total interference score of 45.67 and keeping the overall end-to-end latency around 2.3 × 10 6 ms. The Fig. 4 shows the trade-off between total expected inter-ference and total latency for all service placements evaluated by Optuna. Each blue dot is a candidate placement, scored on two objectives: (1) total interference (i.e., the sum of expected interference over all service pairs derived from STIG weights and PN/PS/PNS metrics) and (2) total latency (i.e., the over-all response-time cost including cross-node communication penalties). Reducing interference generally spreads services across nodes (raising latency), while reducing latency tends to co-locate them (raising interference), so the optimization produces a trade-off between them. The solid blue line is the Pareto front configurations where any further reduction in interference would increase latency and vice versa. The orange point marks the selected placement, with the adjacent values giving its interference–latency pair. It lies on or near the Pareto front, indicating an efficient compro-mise. Latency values are plotted with a constant vertical offset (2.256 ×10 6 subtracted) so that the axis focuses on meaningful variation rather than absolute magnitudes. Overall, we show that Optuna explores a wide range of placements and that the chosen configuration is a trade-off between performance and interference mitigation in the multi-tenant cluster. 

Re-Deployment Results – In this section, we explain the service placement results for the optimized cluster suggested by our Optuna placement method. Table VI reports the raw p95 latency and error statistics for the optimized placement across four test runs for the suggested placement. Book-info and Sock-shop remain in the same general latency regime as in the baseline – book stays around 10.1 s p95 and sock around 47 ms, both with very small variance, which indicates that the optimization does not change their worst-case behaviour. Conversely, TeaStore shows a lower p95 latency of about 8.8 ms, suggesting an improvement over the default cluster results TABLE VI OPTIMIZED CLUSTER -PLACEMENT - LOAD TEST RUN                                                                       

> Run p95 (book, ms) p95 (sock, ms) p95 (tea, ms) req failed (%)
> 110 100.00 47.24 8.80 32.58 210 090.00 47.25 8.74 32.63 310 190.00 47.36 8.76 32.71 410 210.00 47.45 8.83 32.83
> Mean 10 147.50 47.32 8.78 32.69
> Std 61.31 0.10 0.04 0.11 TABLE VII DEFAULT VS OPTIMIZED CLUSTER .P95 IN MS ;FAILURE IN %.
> Metric Default ( μ±σ)Optimized ( μ±σ)∆abs ∆%
> p95 (book, ms) 10 295 .00 ±32 .02 10 147 .50 ±61 .31 −147 .50 −1.43
> p95 (sock, ms) 47 .85 ±0.11 47 .32 ±0.10 −0.53 −1.11
> p95 (tea, ms) 166 .68 ±24 .65 8.78 ±0.04 −157 .90 −94 .73
> req failed (%) 24 .63 ±0.07 32 .69 ±0.11 +8 .06 +32 .72
> TABLE VIII COMPARISON OF OPTIMIZATION STRATEGIES .
> Method Interference Latency (ms)
> Optuna (full causal) 997 .30 7 474 879 .01
> Optuna (no causal, lat-only) 1 763 .49 7 409 925 .13
> GA baseline 1 763 .49 7 409 925 .13
> RL baseline 1 763 .49 7 409 925 .13

in the previous Table II. The HTTP failure rate (req failed) under the optimized placement is consistently around 32.7 %

(slightly higher than in the default configuration). Table VII now combines default and optimized cluster statistics (mean ± standard deviation) with the absolute and relative ∆. Book-info and Sock-shop present modest p95 la-tency reductions of about 1–1.5% , showing that the optimized placement preserves their performance while giving small gains. TeaStore improves dramatically: its p95 latency drops from 166 .68 ± 24 .65 ms to 8.78 ± 0.04 ms, corresponding to 

∆abs = −157 .90 ms and ∆% = −94 .73 , which indicates that a major bottleneck or interference source has been removed. At the same time, the mean HTTP failure rate increases from 

24 .63 ± 0.07% to 32 .69 ± 0.11% (∆abs = +8 .06 percentage points, ∆% = +32 .72 ). Overall, the optimized placement achieves strong latency reductions, especially for TeaStore, but at the cost of an increase in request failures. 

C. Comparison with Baseline: 

We selected few baselines intentionally to compare with selected Optuna optimizer for service placement problem in our study. They reflect standard practice for placement without access to causal information, and all are evaluated under the same search budget as Optuna. The Optuna (no causal, latency-only) configuration is an ablation of our proposed method. It adopts the same optimizer and search space as the full causal Optuna variant, but we remove PN/PS/PNS and STIG from the objective function. This design isolates the contribution of causal information by holding all other components fixed. The Genetic Algorithms (GA) [37] and Reinforcement Learning (RL) [38] baselines are widely used “state-of-the-art” meta-heuristics for placement and scheduling problems. In our setup (Table VIII), both optimize exactly the same latency-only objective as Optuna (i.e., non-causal). This allows us to distinguish whether any observed im-provements are due to the optimization algorithm (Optuna vs GA/RL) or due to the objective formulation (causal vs non-causal). All four strategies are evaluated using the same objective, full-causal interference (PN/PS/PNS, weighted by STIG) combined with placement-sensitive latency. We observe that all latency-only strategies (Optuna no-causal, GA, RL) converge to the same placement. They achieve essentially identical interference and latency. This is consistent with the fact that they optimize the same latency-only objective, and it also indicates that Optuna is competitive with GA and RL as a generic black-box optimizer. In contrast, the full-causal Optuna configuration converges to a different placement, the interference decreases from approximately 1763 to 997 (about a 43% reduction), at the cost of a small increase in latency (around +0.9%). This baseline design supports the follow-ing interpretation, relative to realistic “black-box” heuristics (GA/RL) that only observe latency, augmenting the objective with PN/PS/PNS and STIG systematically steers Optuna to-ward placements with substantially lower causal interference. Since GA and RL reproduce the latency-only Optuna solution, the observed improvements cannot be attributed merely to Optuna being a stronger optimizer, they arise specifically from incorporating causal knowledge into the placement objective. 

D. Answers to Research Questions 

RQ.1 Answer: Yes , interference is high both in terms of density (many contending services per node) and impact (large latency inflation). Under the default cluster placement, interference appears in how far it spreads across nodes and how much it worsens latency. Services from BookInfo, Sock-shop, and TeaStore are densely co-located on the same Ku-bernetes worker node, so they compete for CPU, memory, and network queues. This amplifies even moderate cross-traffic and produces clear contention in the traces (Figure 3). The PN, PS, and PNS estimates (Table IV) capture this effect, for example, webui.teastore → reviews.bookinfo and webui.teastore → rat-ings.bookinfo both have PN = 100 with PNS/PS above 96, while productpage.bookinfo → webui.teastore reaches PNS = 92.68 and PS = 100 (inclusive the reverse edge also has PN = 92.68), all indicating strong causal interference when these services share a node. Because high-traffic services are concentrated on a small subset of nodes, the interference is localized but intense, driving p95 latencies from hundreds up to tens of thousands of milliseconds for some services that failed to serve the request. For instance, webui.teastore service has failure rate 50% larger than other services (Table III). Therefore, the higher density (contending services per node) and impact (latency) motivate a causal-aware placement as a means to mitigate interference and recover performance. 

RQ.2 Answer : Yes . Across all test runs, the causal Optuna model best recovers from performance degradation, shown in Table VII. Even as the number of services and com-munication patterns grows, the optimizer consistently finds placements with much lower interference than all non-causal baselines. The results also expose a key trade-off: reducing TABLE IX ABLATION SUMMARY (BEST POSSIBLE VALUES ). A LL LATENCY VALUES IN MILLISECONDS , I NTERFERENCE IS A SCORE .            

> Configuration Interference Latency (ms)
> Causal (PN/PS/PNS ×STIG) 0.000 1781622.249 No PN/PS/PNS (STIG only) 2.400 2256455.232 No STIG (PN/PS/PNS only) 300.000 2256505.232 Latency-only (non-causal baseline) undetectable 2256405.232

interference usually means spreading services across nodes, but spreading them increases cross-node latency. The causal model learns placements that balance these forces, while non-causal methods either (a) over-concentrate services and cause interference, or (b) overspread them and inflate latency. Over-all, the approach remains effective, minimizing both residual interference and the number of impacted nodes as connectivity complexity increases. 

RQ.3 Answer: Yes , causal knowledge (PNS and STIGs) has a discernible impact on placement effectiveness. The ablation experiments show that removing causal components degrades performance, as follows: (a) Without PN/PS/PNS, the opti-mizer loses direction and strength of interference, leading to near-random co-locations and much higher total interference; (b) Without STIG (temporal–topological severity), it cannot distinguish mild from severe interference patterns, leading to suboptimal placements even when PN/PS/PNS are present; and (c) Removing both reduces the system to a latency-only optimizer, which consistently underperforms the causal model. Table IX shows an ablation study that covers a full causal model (PN/PS/PNS × STIGs knowledge) achieves zero inter-ference with slightly less latency comparable to all ablations. With STIG only, interference rises slightly (2.4) with virtually no latency benefit. With PN/PS/PNS only, interference jumps sharply (300) despite similar latency. The latency-only base-line also finds an undetectable interference placement in this small case. However, without modeling interference structure, it is unlikely that its identification will be reliable under tighter constraints or higher contention. Each causal component adds distinct, non-redundant information, and their combination for near-optimal interference-aware placement. VI. D ISCUSSION 

A. Implications 

This work shows that treating service placement as a cross-application interference-aware, multi-objective optimization problem yields measurable gains in tail latency and stabil-ity for multi-application clusters. It indicates that topology-agnostic scheduling leaves performance on the table, even without changing code or resource limits. Placements guided by empirical interference profiles can significantly reduce p95 latency, especially for highly contended services like TeaStore. The framework exposes explicit trade-offs among latency, interference, and cross-node communication, making it useful as a decision-support tool for operators choosing Pareto-optimal placements that reflect current priorities (for example, isolation for critical services versus lower network cost at peak). More broadly, the results suggest that interference can inform service placement alongside CPU and memory usage. While we showed that in a reactive feedback control loop (MAPE-K), our causal approach could also inform self-stabilizing orchestration [39] and, eventually, be integrated with Kubernetes schedulers and autoscalers [40]–[42]. 

B. Threats to validity 

Internal Validity – The interference model is learned from offline profiling with Optuna rather than being deployed in a live scheduler. As a result, it may not adapt to short-term work-load shifts or concept drift in real deployments. Moreover, the estimation of “causal interference” relies on correlations that may be biased by unobserved confounding factors, potentially affecting the accuracy of the inferred relationships. 

External Validity – The evaluation relies on a fixed set of multi-application workloads and microservice topologies (Book, Sock, and Tea e-commerce stacks). These testbeds may not capture the diversity of interference patterns present in larger, heterogeneous clusters, or under conditions such as bursty traffic, GPU-intensive, or batch workloads. Conse-quently, the generalizability of the results to broader produc-tion contexts remains limited. 

Construct Validity – The analysis focuses on p95 re-sponse time and HTTP failure rate as primary quality-of-service (QoS) metrics. Other important dimensions, such as p99 latency, jitter, throughput, energy efficiency, or cost, are not optimized, and these may exhibit different behaviors. Our metric selection could restrict how comprehensively the study captures system performance. VII. C ONCLUSION & F UTURE WORK 

We introduced an interference-aware, cross-application placement method for containerized microservices in shared clusters. Our approach is driven by causal knowledge of counterfactual probabilities of sufficiency and necessity computed through a Spatio-Temporal representation model (STIG) of the interference phenomenon. By combining cross-application profiling, per-service latency baselines, and the STIG-based estimates of probabilities of sufficiency and ne-cessity (PN/PS/PNS), we formulated service placement as a multi-objective optimization problem that minimizes in-terference and improves response times under network and isolation constraints. Using Optuna’s multi-objective engine, our study explored trade-offs between latency, interference, and communication cost to derive the Pareto-optimal place-ments that reflect operator preferences. The results indicate that a causality-driven multi-objective formulation provides operators with explicit control over interference, latency, and communication overhead. In future work we plan to integrate the optimizer with an online scheduler, extend the interference model with additional QoS and reliability metrics, and scale the experiments to larger and more heterogeneous clusters. Algorithm 1 Compute cross-application causal probabilities 

Require: Cleaned trace D with spans 

(spanID , traceID , service name , startTime , duration , error tag ),application map AppOf (·), time window ∆t, duration anomaly threshold z, minimum events per service M .

Ensure: PN/PS/PNS table T over cross-application service pairs.  

> 1:

Load D from CSV.  

> 2:

For each span, parse startTime into timestamp ts. 

> 3:

Convert duration to seconds and compute end time te ←

ts + duration.  

> 4:

For each service s, compute mean μs and standard devi-ation σs of span durations.  

> 5:

Set per-service duration threshold τs ← μs + z · σs. 

> 6:

Mark span i as anomalous if error tag i = True or 

duration i > τ service name i . 

> 7:

Let Da be the subset of anomalous spans.  

> 8:

For each service s, count anomalous spans ns in Da and keep only services with ns ≥ M . 

> 9:

For each remaining service s, sort spans by ts and store arrays tss and tse. 

> 10:

Initialize empty result table T . 

> 11:

function TemporalHits (tXs , t Xe , t Ys , ∆t) 

> 12:

h ← 0 

> 13:

for each event i of X do  

> 14:

window ← [tXs,i , t Xe,i + ∆ t] 

> 15:

if any tYs falls in window then h ← h + 1  

> 16:

return h 

> 17:

end function  

> 18:

function IndependentFrac (tXs , t Xe , t Ys , ∆t) 

> 19:

if |tYs | = 0 then return 0.0 

> 20:

u ← 0 

> 21:

for each t ∈ tYs do  

> 22:

covered ← False  

> 23:

for each event i of X do  

> 24:

window ← [tXs,i , t Xe,i + ∆ t] 

> 25:

if t in window then covered ← True  

> 26:

if not covered then u ← u + 1  

> 27:

return u/ |tYs | 

> 28:

end function  

> 29:

for all ordered pairs of services (X, Y ) with X̸ = Y do  

> 30:

if AppOf (X) = AppOf (Y ) then  

> 31:

continue {skip same-application pairs } 

> 32:

end if  

> 33:

Extract tXs , t Xe , t Ys from Da. 

> 34:

if |tXs | = 0 or |tYs | = 0 then  

> 35:

continue  

> 36:

end if  

> 37:

NX ← | tXs | 

> 38:

h ← TemporalHits (tXs , t Xe , t Ys , ∆t) 

> 39:

P (Y |X) ← h/N X 

> 40:

P (Y |¬ X) ← IndependentFrac (tXs , t Xe , t Ys , ∆t) 

> 41:

P N S ← max(0 , P (Y |X) − P (Y |¬ X))  

> 42:

P N ←

(

P N S/P (Y |X) if P (Y |X) > 00 otherwise  

> 43:

P S ←

(

P N S/  1 − P (Y |¬ X) if 1 − P (Y |¬ X) > 00 otherwise  

> 44:

Append row (X, Y, AppOf (X), AppOf (Y ), ]

P (Y |X), P (Y |¬ X), P N S, P N, P S, N X , |tYs |) to T . 

> 45:

end for  

> 46:

return T .

Algorithm 2 Service Placement by Optimizer (SPO) 

Require: Probability table (PS,PN,PNS) P (columns 

X, Y, App (X), App (Y ), P N, P S, P N S ), response-time log R, STIG graphs directory G, set of nodes N , number of optimization trials T .

Ensure: Best placement π⋆ : S → N , total interference 

I(π⋆), total latency L(π⋆), service priorities Priority (s). 

> 1:

Parse R and compute median p95 latency L(s) for each service s. 

> 2:

Parse P and map (X, Y, App (X), App (Y )) to canonical service keys (s, t ) using the service-name map.  

> 3:

Parse all STIG graphs in G and aggregate interference weights wSTIG (s, t ) for each service pair (s, t ). 

> 4:

Let S be the union of all services that appear in R, P or 

G. 

> 5:

For every pair (s, t ) that appears in both P and G: 

> 6:

read P N (s, t ), P S (s, t ), P N S (s, t ) from P; 

> 7:

compute causal factor α(s, t ) ← P N (s, t ) + 

P S (s, t ) − P N S (s, t ); 

> 8:

compute expected interference E(s, t ) ← α(s, t ) ·

wSTIG (s, t ). 

> 9:

Build communication edge set C as undirected pairs {s, t }

whenever (s, t ) or (t, s ) exists in P. 

> 10:

for all services {s} ∈ S do  

> 11:

Priority (s) ← P 

> t

E(s, t ) 

> 12:

end for  

> 13:

for k = 1 to T do  

> 14:

Optimizer proposes a placement πk : S → N by sampling a node index for each service.  

> 15:

I(πk) ← 0; L(πk) ← P 

> s∈S

L(s). 

> 16:

for all ordered pairs (s, t ) with defined E(s, t ) do  

> 17:

if πk(s) = πk(t) then  

> 18:

I(πk) ← I(πk) + E(s, t ). 

> 19:

end if  

> 20:

end for  

> 21:

for all edges {s, t } ∈ C do  

> 22:

if πk(s)̸ = πk(t) then  

> 23:

L(πk) ← L(πk) + NET PENALTY MS.  

> 24:

end if  

> 25:

end for  

> 26:

Report objective vector (I(πk), L (πk)) to Optimizer.  

> 27:

end for  

> 28:

Retrieve the Pareto-optimal trials from the Optimizer study.  

> 29:

Select π⋆ from the Pareto front using a tie-breaking rule (e.g., minimum I(π), then minimum L(π)).  

> 30:

return π⋆, I(π⋆), L(π⋆), and Priority (s) for all s.REFERENCES [1] S. Newman, Building microservices: designing fine-grained systems .O’Reilly, 2021. [2] M. Adeppady, C. Chiasserini, H. Karl, and P. Giaccone, “iplace: An interference-aware clustering algorithm for microservice placement,” in 

Proc. of the IEEE Int. Conf. on Communications (ICC) , 2022. [3] I. Zafar, “Towards interference-resilient multi-tenant microservices via spatio-temporal models of self-configuration,” in 2024 IEEE Interna-tional Conference on Autonomic Computing and Self-Organizing Sys-tems Companion (ACSOS-C) . IEEE, 2024, pp. 173–175. [4] X. Pu, L. Liu, Y. Mei, S. Sivathanu, Y. Koh, and C. Pu, “Understanding performance interference of i/o workload in virtualized cloud environ-ments,” in IEEE 3rd Int. Conf. on Cloud Computing . Miami, FL, USA: IEEE, 2010, pp. 51–58. [5] M. Adeppady, P. Giaccone, H. Karl, and C. F. Chiasserini, “Reducing microservices interference and deployment time in resource-constrained cloud systems,” IEEE Trans. on Network and Service Management ,vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 3135–3147, 2023. [6] P. Souza, J. Nascimento, C. Boeira, ˆA. Vieira, F. Rubin, R. Reis, F. Rossi, and T. Ferreto, “IRENE: Interference and high availability aware microservice-based applications placement for edge computing,” in Proc. of the 10th Int. Conf. on Cloud Computing and Services Science (CLOSER) . SCITEPRESS, 2020. [7] S. Song, M. Xu, Z. Zhang, C. Gao, F. Zeng, Y. Ding, K. Ye, and C. Xu, “C-koordinator: Interference-aware management for large-scale and co-located microservice clusters,” arXiv preprint , 2025. [8] Z. Qu et al. , “Community and priority-based microservice placement in dynamic microservice systems,” Journal of Systems Architecture , 2024, interference-aware community- and priority-based placement. [9] C. Krupitzer, F. M. Roth, S. VanSyckel, G. Schiele, and C. Becker, “A survey on engineering approaches for self-adaptive systems,” Pervasive and Mobile Computing , vol. 17, pp. 184–206, 2015. [10] I. Zafar, C. M. Adriano, and H. Giese, “Stigs: Spatio-temporal interfer-ence graph simulator for self-configurable multi-tenant cloud systems,” in Companion of the 15th ACM/SPEC International Conference on Performance Engineering , 2024, pp. 52–56. [11] S. Zhuravlev, S. Blagodurov, and A. Fedorova, “Addressing shared re-source contention in multicore processors via scheduling,” ACM Sigplan Notices , vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 129–142, 2010. [12] S. Beckers, “Causal sufficiency and actual causation,” Journal of Philo-sophical Logic , vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1341–1374, 2021. [13] J. Pearl, Causality . Cambridge university press, 2009. [14] J. Y. Halpern and C. Hitchcock, “Actual causation and the art of modeling,” Metaphysica , vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 25–61, 2010. [15] T. Eiter and T. Lukasiewicz, “Causes and explanations in the structural-model approach: Tractable cases,” Artificial Intelligence , vol. 116, no. 1–2, pp. 23–74, 2002. [16] J. Y. Halpern and J. Pearl, “Causes and explanations: A structural-model approach. part i: Causes,” British Journal for the Philosophy of Science ,vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 843–887, 2005. [17] C. M. Adriano, S. Ghahremani, F. Kaiser, and H. Giese, “Neuro-symbolic causal reasoning for cautious self-adaptation under distribution shifts,” in 2025 IEEE International Conference on Autonomic Computing and Self-Organizing Systems (ACSOS) . IEEE, 2025, pp. 88–99. [18] A. Aleti, B. Buhnova, L. Grunske, A. Koziolek, and I. Meedeniya, “Software architecture optimization methods: A systematic literature review,” IEEE Trans. on Software Engineering , vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 658– 683, 2012. [19] J. Soldani and A. Brogi, “Anomaly detection and failure root cause analysis in (micro) service-based cloud applications: A survey,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) , vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 1–39, 2022. [20] Y. Gan, G. Liu, X. Zhang, Q. Zhou, J. Wu, and J. Jiang, “Sleuth: A trace-based root cause analysis system for large-scale microservices with graph neural networks,” in Proc. of the 28th ACM Int. Conf. on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 4 , 2023, pp. 324–337. [21] I. Benamor, M. Zarour, and A. Tari, “Towards a framework for optimized microservices placement in cloud native environments,” Int. Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications , vol. 15, no. 7, 2024. [22] M. N. Abadeh, “Multi-objective reconfiguration of evolving real-time microservices-based environments using energy-based nuclear reaction optimization,” Systems , 2025, multi-objective nuclear-reaction-based meta-heuristic for real-time microservices. [Online]. Available: https://scimet.iau.ir/University.php?id=157 [23] T. Akiba, S. Sano, T. Yanase, T. Ohta, and M. Koyama, “Optuna: A next-generation hyperparameter optimization framework,” in Proc. of the 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining . ACM, 2019. [24] K. Kittikamron, N. Manop, A. Chanakitkarnchok, and K. Rojviboonchai, “Edge service placement optimization for location-based service,” in 

20th Int. Joint Conf. on Computer Science and Software Engineering (JCSSE) . IEEE, 2023, pp. 488–493. [25] C. Lohse, D. Tsutsumi, A. Ba, P. Harsha, C. Subramanian, M. Straesser, and M. Ruffini, “Causal latency modelling for cloud microservices,” in 

IEEE 18th Int. Conf. on Cloud Computing . IEEE, 2025, pp. 143–151. [26] C. Mascia, R. Pietrantuono, A. Guerriero, L. Giamattei, and S. Russo, “Microservices performance testing with causality-enhanced large lan-guage models,” in Proc. of the 2nd ACM Int. Conf. on AI Foundation Models and Software Engineering (FORGE) , 2025. [27] Q. Wang, L. Shwartz et al. , “Detecting causal structure on cloud application microservices using granger causality models,” in Proc. of the IEEE Int. Conf. on Cloud Computing (CLOUD) , 2021. [28] L. Pham et al. , “Root cause analysis for microservices based on causal inference: How far are we?” in Proc. of the 39th IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) , 2024. [29] T. Wang and G. Qi, “A comprehensive survey on root cause analysis in (micro) services: methodologies, challenges, and trends,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00803 , 2024. [30] M. Panahandeh, A. Hamou-Lhadj, M. Hamdaqa, and J. Miller, “Ser-viceanomaly: An anomaly detection approach in microservices using distributed traces and profiling metrics,” Journal of Systems and Soft-ware , vol. 209, p. 111917, 2024. [31] S. Rajagopalan and H. Jamjoom, “ {App–bisect }: Autonomous healing for {microservice-based } apps,” in Proc. of the 7th USENIX Workshop on Hot Topics in Cloud Computing (HotCloud 15) , 2015. [32] L. Wu, J. Tordsson, E. Elmroth, and O. Kao, “Microrca: Root cause localization of performance issues in microservices,” in Proc. of the IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symp. (NOMS) , 2020. [33] Z. Yao, C. Pei, W. Chen, H. Wang, L. Su, H. Jiang, Z. Xie, X. Nie, and D. Pei, “Chain-of-event: Interpretable root cause analysis for microser-vices through automatically learning weighted event causal graph,” in 

Companion Proc. of the 32nd ACM Int. Conf. on the Foundations of Software Engineering , 2024, pp. 50–61. [34] Z. Yao, H. Ye, C. Pei, G. Cheng, G. Wang, Z. Liu, H. Chen, H. Cui, Z. Li, J. Li et al. , “Sparserca: Unsupervised root cause analysis in sparse microservice testing traces,” in Proc. of the IEEE 35th Int. Symp. on Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE) . IEEE, 2024, pp. 391–402. [35] Z. Zhang, M. K. Ramanathan, P. Raj, A. Parwal, T. Sherwood, and M. Chabbi, “ {CRISP }: Critical path analysis of {Large-Scale } microser-vice architectures,” in Proc. of the USENIX Annual Technical Conf. (USENIX ATC 22) , 2022, pp. 655–672. [36] M. Allam, N. Boujnah, N. E. O’Connor, and M. Liu, “Synthetic time series for anomaly detection in cloud microservices,” in Int. Conf. on Machine Learning, Optimization, and Data Science . Springer, 2024, pp. 419–433. [37] R. Saravanan, P. Asokan, and M. Sachidanandam, “A multi-objective genetic algorithm (ga) approach for optimization of surface grinding operations,” Int. journal of machine tools and manufacture , vol. 42, no. 12, pp. 1327–1334, 2002. [38] A. K. Shakya, G. Pillai, and S. Chakrabarty, “Reinforcement learning algorithms: A brief survey,” Expert Systems with Applications , vol. 231, p. 120495, 2023. [39] B. Cai, X. Wang, B. Wang, M. Yang, Y. Guo, and Q. Guo, “A self-stabilizing and auto-provisioning orchestration for microservices in edge-cloud continuum,” Computer Networks , vol. 242, p. 110279, 2024. [40] E. Incerto, R. Pizziol, and M. Tribastone, “ μopt: An efficient optimal autoscaler for microservice applications,” in 2023 IEEE Int. Conf. on Autonomic Computing and Self-Organizing Systems (ACSOS) . IEEE, 2023, pp. 67–76. [41] G. Quattrocchi, E. Incerto, R. Pinciroli, C. Trubiani, and L. Baresi, “Autoscaling solutions for cloud applications under dynamic workloads,” 

IEEE Trans. on Services Computing , vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 804–820, 2024. [42] P. Liang, Y. Xun, J. Cai, and H. Yang, “Autoscaling of microservice resources based on dense connectivity spatio-temporal gnn and q-learning,” Future Generation Computer Systems , vol. 174, p. 107909, 2026.