Title: Formal Foundations and Proof-Carrying Certificates for q-ary Covering Codes in Lean 4

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.09600v1

Published Time: Tue, 09 Jun 2026 02:47:16 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
Preprint, arXiv-v1, June 2026 

# Formal Foundations and Proof-Carrying Certificates for q-ary Covering Codes in Lean 4 

## Andreas Florath 1

Abstract 

Covering codes in finite Hamming spaces ask for small sets of words whose Hamming balls cover the whole space. This paper presents a L EAN 4 formalization of the elementary theory of q-ary covering codes, centered on certificate predicates for upper bounds, lower bounds, and exact covering numbers Kq(n, r). The formalization proves the q-ary Hamming-ball volume formula, the sphere-covering lower bound, elementary exact cases, product and relation rules, and selected small exact certificates. It also demonstrates an end-to-end workflow for checking explicit upper bounds transcribed from van Laarhoven et al. (1989). The accompanying database is proof-carrying: stored bounds have traces that replay to L EAN proofs of the corresponding upper- or lower-bound predicates. The contribution is not new record bounds or a reproduction of known tables, but a reusable, auditable foundation for machine-checked covering-code certificates. 

Keywords 

Covering Codes — Hamming Spaces — Formalized Mathematics — Lean 4 — Combinatorics 

> 1

Deutsche Telekom AG, Andreas.Florath@telekom.de 

## Contents 

1 Introduction 22 Finite Hamming Spaces 3

2.1 Coordinate types and alphabets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 2.2 The q-ary specialization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 2.3 Hamming distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 2.4 Balls and exact-distance layers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 2.5 Cardinalities and ball volume . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 

3 Covering Codes and Covering Numbers 5

3.1 Covering codes as subsets of Hamming space . . . . . . . . 5 3.2 Set-valued and finset-valued predicates . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 3.3 Elementary interpretation as set cover . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 3.4 The q-ary covering number . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 3.5 Certificate-style exactness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 3.6 Examples of exactness statements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 3.7 Specializations and naming discipline . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 

4 Elementary General Theorems 7

4.1 Ball lemmas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 4.2 Radius monotonicity of covers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 4.3 Full-space covers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 4.4 Large-radius covers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 4.5 Zero-radius exactness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 4.6 Length-zero and length-one consequences . . . . . . . . . . 8 4.7 The near-diameter value . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 

5 Hamming Balls and the Sphere-Covering Bound 9

5.1 Proof of the ball volume formula . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 5.2 The sphere-covering lower bound . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 5.3 Lower bound via ceiling division . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 

6 Elementary Constructions 11 

6.1 Sum-type words . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 6.2 Additivity of Hamming distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 6.3 The product code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 6.4 Product covering theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 

7 Neighbor Relations and Structural Code Transforma-tions 12 

7.1 Indexed concatenation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 7.2 Structural explicit-code rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 

8 Case Study: Formalizing Published Covering Codes 13 

8.1 Source paper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 8.2 Data extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 8.3 Lean encoding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 8.4 Switchable finite proof mode and resource use . . . . . . . 14 8.5 Certificate packaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 8.6 What this demonstrates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 

9 Certified Bounds and Proof-Carrying Database 14 

9.1 Certificate structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 9.2 Trust boundary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 9.3 Imported explicit codes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 9.4 A two-block cyclic upper bound for Kq(3, 1) . . . . . . . . . 15 9.5 Selected database certificates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 9.6 Closure and query consistency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 9.7 Path toward solver certificates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 

10 Prior Art 16 

10.1 Related formalization work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 

11 Discussion and Future Work 17 A Artifact and Declaration Map 18 B Database Closure Diagnostics 18 

1     

> arXiv:2606.09600v1 [cs.IT] 8 Jun 2026 Formal Foundations and Proof-Carrying Certificates for q-ary Covering Codes in Lean 4 — 2/20 Acknowledgements 18 Author Contributions 18 Use of AI Tools 19 Competing Interests 19

## 1. Introduction 

A simple way to meet covering codes is through a rook-placement problem. Place some rooks on a q × q board, and call a square covered if it is occupied or lies in the same row or column as an occupied square. The question is how few rooks are needed to cover the board. This is already a covering-code problem: the board is the set of pairs {0, . . . , q − 1}2, and one rook covers all positions that differ from its own position in at most one coordinate. Higher dimensional versions replace the board by qn grid points and ask for a small set of centers whose Hamming balls cover the whole grid. Another classical example is the football-pool problem [1, 2]. Suppose each of n matches has three possible outcomes, viewed from the perspective of the listed home team: win, draw, or loss. A betting ticket is therefore a word in a ternary alphabet. The covering-code version of the pool problem asks how many tickets are needed to guarantee a prize-level result: whatever the actual match outcomes are, at least one submitted ticket should have at most one wrong prediction, or equiva-lently at least n − 1 correct predictions. This happens exactly when every possible outcome vector differs from some ticket in at most one coordinate. In modern notation this asks for 

K3(n, 1), the minimum size of a ternary radius-one covering code. These examples illustrate the general problem. In the Ham-ming space over a finite alphabet A, a word of length n is an element of An, and the Hamming distance dh(x, y) counts the number of coordinates in which two words differ [3]. We write N for the natural numbers including 0 . For r ∈ N, an r-covering code is a subset C ⊆ An such that every word x ∈ An

lies within Hamming distance r of some codeword c ∈ C.Writing q := |A|, the q-ary covering number is defined by 

Kq(n, r) = min { | C| : C ⊆ An and C is an r-cover }

and is the minimum size of such a covering code [4]. Thus 

Kq(n, r) asks for the smallest number of Hamming balls of radius r needed to cover the whole space. The definition is elementary, but the known values and bounds are built from a mixture of ingredients: explicit con-structions, counting arguments, recursive relations between pa-rameters, computer searches, and tables of best known bounds. Even for small parameters, an exact statement Kq(n, r) = k

usually has two independent parts. One must exhibit a cover-ing code with k codewords, and one must prove that no smaller code can cover. These two parts often come from different sources. This makes covering codes a natural test case for formal-ized mathematics. The objects are finite and concrete, so many proposed upper bounds can be checked by computation. At the same time, the correctness of a covering-number claim depends on precise definitions, edge cases, and reusable math-ematical lemmas. For example, one has to say exactly what happens for the empty alphabet q = 0 , for length n = 0 , and for radii r ≥ n. Informal tables usually suppress such conventions; a theorem prover cannot. The aim of this paper is to turn elementary covering-code theory into machine-checkable certificates. A certificate here means a theorem-prover object which can be checked inde-pendently of the program, search procedure, or table entry that suggested it. An explicit code proves an upper bound only after the theorem prover checks that its Hamming balls really cover the space. A lower bound proves a different statement: every possible code below a given size fails. When the two bounds meet, they combine to an exact covering number. The formalization is written in Lean 4 [5]. It provides finite Hamming spaces, Hamming balls, covering predicates, upper-bound and lower-bound certificates, exactness certifi-cates, the q-ary ball-volume formula, the sphere-covering lower bound, structural constructions, and a proof-carrying database of covering-code bounds. The database stores not only numerical bounds, but also traces explaining how they were obtained. Replaying such a trace in Lean reconstructs a proof of the corresponding upper or lower bound. To the author’s knowledge, this is the first proof-assistant develop-ment whose central objects are q-ary covering numbers and composable covering-code certificates; the main paper-level result is this auditable certificate interface rather than any single numerical bound. A guiding design choice is to model words as functions from a coordinate type to an alphabet type. In Lean notation, the general word type is represented as a dependent function type,  

> Word

ι β := ( i : ι) → β i,

and the ordinary q-ary Hamming space of length n is the specialization Fin n → Fin q.

This representation makes the q-ary case simple while preserv-ing a more general interface for finite coordinate types and dependent alphabets. Closed balls and covering predicates are then defined above this word layer. Covering predicates come in both set-valued and finset-valued forms, because mathe-matical statements are often cleaner over sets while exact covering-number certificates and finite computations require finsets. A second design choice concerns how to represent the covering number Kq(n, r) in the theorem prover. Defining it directly as a function would require committing to a specific minimum construction in Lean, with its own proof obligations. Such a definition would also be noncomputable in Lean’s sense: logically well-defined, but not directly evaluable by the proof kernel. Making this choice prematurely would lock the Formal Foundations and Proof-Carrying Certificates for q-ary Covering Codes in Lean 4 — 3/20 

formalization into one design decision before it is clear which is most convenient. Instead, the formalization represents the assertion Kq(n, r) = 

k as a predicate — a logical statement that k satisfies the two conditions that characterise the minimum. A statement  

> KSpec

r k asserts: (1) there exists a finite radius-r covering code of size k (an explicit upper-bound witness), and (2) ev-ery finite radius-r covering code has size at least k (a lower-bound proof). Together these two conditions are equivalent to 

Kq(n, r) = k, but without ever defining Kq as a function. The 

q-ary specialization is written QaryKSpec q n r k .This approach matches the natural structure of covering-code proofs — an explicit construction for the upper bound and a counting argument for the lower bound — and keeps the formalization modular: results from different sources (explicit constructions, sphere-covering bounds, or later computational certificates) can be assembled independently. The two com-ponent predicates are also available separately: KUpper r k 

expresses Kq(n, r) ≤ k and KLower r k expresses Kq(n, r) ≥ k,with a lemma KSpec.ofUpperLower recombining them into an exact certificate whenever both bounds agree on the same value k.

Contributions. This paper is a foundation paper rather than a record-setting paper. Its contributions are the following. (1) It gives a Lean-compatible framework for finite Ham-ming spaces and q-ary covering codes, with words rep-resented as functions and q-ary words as Fin n → Fin q.The framework includes set-valued and finset-valued covering predicates and treats boundary cases such as 

q = 0, n = 0, and r ≥ n inside the formal statements. (2) It develops certificate-style predicates for upper bounds (KUpper ), lower bounds ( KLower ), and exact covering numbers ( KSpec ), together with lemmas that project and recombine these certificates. (3) It formalizes the q-ary Hamming-ball volume formula 

Vq(n, r) = 

> min (r,n)

# ∑

> i=0

ni



(q − 1)i (q ≥ 1),

using a Lean-total definition, and derives the classical sphere-covering lower bound. It also proves elementary exact cases, including radius zero and the near-diameter value Kq(n, n − 1) = q for 1 ≤ n.(4) It formalizes product and neighbor-relation rules for transporting covering-code bounds, including length, alphabet, block, concatenation, and structural explicit-code transformations. One uniform construction gives 

Kq(3, 1) ≤ ⌊ q/2⌋2 + ⌈q/2⌉2 = ⌈q2/2⌉.

(5) It provides a trace-based proof-carrying database and demonstrates the artifact workflow on explicit pub-lished codes. Stored bounds replay to L EAN proofs of QaryKUpper or QaryKLower ; selected exact cer-tificates include K2(5, 1) = 7 , K2(6, 2) = 4 , K3(3, 1) = 

5, and K4(3, 1) = 8 . The van Laarhoven case study yields checked upper-bound certificates for K3(6, 1) ≤

73, K3(7, 1) ≤ 186, and K3(8, 1) ≤ 486. The scope is intentionally limited. The paper does not claim new best bounds for Kq(n, r) and does not attempt to reproduce the full tables of known covering-code values from the literature. The case study shows that committed explicit code data transcribed from a publication can be made into a Lean certificate, and the database section shows that register-ing such a certificate as a primitive source is straightforward. The selected small exact certificates are included because they exercise the same upper/lower/exactness interfaces beyond the trivial structural families; their authority comes from the Lean proof terms, not from any external table entry used to identify candidate triples. The finite covering-code problem has a direct set-cover formulation: choose binary variables for candidate codewords and require every word to be covered by at least one selected radius-r ball. This formulation is the natu-ral bridge to future SAT and integer-programming certificates; the switchable proof mode in the case study is a first step in that direction, and extending it to solver-generated certificates is left for future work.  

> Artifact availability.

The Lean artifact is available from the source repository at the following fixed revision: 

> github.com/florath/covering-codes-lean 460df105545c2d6b04ba71f29de6b56dbda92825

All source-code links in this manuscript refer to that revision rather than to a moving branch. Artifact paths are relative to the repository root. The build and query instructions are recorded in README.md . The ordinary proof mode checks finite certificates through Lean’s kernel reduction path; the op-tional native proof mode is used only when explicitly enabled and has the trust boundary described in Section 9.2.  

> Artifact audit workflow.

For routine referee inspection, the recommended first artifact check is the native proof-mode workflow described there. It compiles the command-line query interface and the generated-table dependencies, then exercises representative database queries. The proof-mode switch af-fects only expensive finite covering checks. In native mode, those checks additionally rely on Lean’s native compiled eval-uator; in kernel mode, the same checks use ordinary decide .Kernel mode is the stronger replay path for those finite leaves, but the largest explicit-code files require the resources shown in Table 3. The remaining components (handwritten theory, generated trace typing, and trace replay) are typechecked by Lean in the same way in both modes. 

## 2. Finite Hamming Spaces 

This section fixes the ambient objects used throughout the paper. The mathematics is standard: the points of a finite Ham-ming space are finite words, and the distance between two Formal Foundations and Proof-Carrying Certificates for q-ary Covering Codes in Lean 4 — 4/20 

words is the number of coordinates in which they differ. The formalization is slightly more general than the usual q-ary presentation, because many elementary lemmas do not de-pend on the alphabet being constant across coordinates. The terminology and notation for finite Hamming spaces, Ham-ming distance, Hamming balls, shells, covering radius, and the covering number Kq(n, r) follow the standard conventions of coding and covering-code theory; for general coding-theory background see MacWilliams and Sloane [6] and van Lint [7], and for covering-code notation see Cohen et al. [4, Sec. 2.1]. 

2.1 Coordinate types and alphabets 

Let ι be a finite type of coordinates. For each coordinate i : ι,let βi be the alphabet available at that coordinate. A word over these coordinate alphabets is a dependent function 

x : ∏

> i:ι

βi.

In Lean this is represented directly by a dependent function type:             

> abbrev Word (ι: Type u) ( β:ι→Type v) : Type _ := (i :ι)→βi

This choice keeps the formal interface close to the mathemat-ical notation. A word x is applied to a coordinate i, and the paper notation xi corresponds to the Lean expression x i .The assumptions needed for this layer are explicit. The coordinate type must be finite, because Hamming distance is a finite count over coordinates. Equality at every coordinate alphabet must be decidable, because the set of positions at which two words differ is defined by a decidable predicate. When cardinalities of word spaces are used, the coordinate alphabets are also assumed finite. Keeping the coordinate type abstract is useful later. For example, the product construction for two codes is naturally stated over a sum of coordinate types before being transported to the usual Fin (n1 + n2) representation. Thus the q-ary case is the main specialization, not the only setting in which the elementary API is valid. 

2.2 The q-ary specialization 

For q, n ∈ N, the q-ary Hamming space of length n is 

Hq(n) := ( Fin q)Fin n,

which we also write informally as (Fin q)n. In Lean this specialization is named as follows:        

> abbrev QaryWord (q n : N) : Type := Fin n→Fin q

Thus QaryWord q n is the type of length-n words over an alphabet with q symbols. The definitions do not build in assumptions such as q > 0or n > 0 . For example, Fin 0 is the empty type; hence there are no words of positive length over the alphabet Fin 0 , while there is still one empty word when n = 0 . This agrees with the finite-type cardinality identity 

| Fin n → Fin q| = qn,

including the convention 00 = 1. Later theorems add nonempti-ness hypotheses, such as q ≥ 1, q ≥ 2, or n ≥ 1, exactly where they are mathematically needed. Both Word and QaryWord are introduced with Lean’s  

> abbrev

keyword rather than def , which makes them trans-parent to the type-checking kernel. As a result, QaryWord q n is definitionally equal to Word (Fin n) (fun : Fin n => Fin q) , and every general theorem about Word ι β

applies to q-ary words directly, without any explicit coercion or type cast. This two-layer design — a general layer over abstract ι

and β , and a q-ary specialization with explicit q, n, r, k — is used throughout the formalization. General lemmas such as triangle inequalities, ball monotonicity, radius monotonicity of covers, and the product construction are proved once over arbitrary finite coordinate types. Concrete covering-code state-ments are then stated with q-ary names such as QaryKSpec q n r k , so the mathematically meaningful parameters re-main visible. Because the q-ary layer is transparent to Lean’s kernel, this specialization does not introduce a second proof layer. 

2.3 Hamming distance 

For two words x, y : ∏i:ι βi, the Hamming distance is 

dh(x, y) = |{ i : ι : xi̸ = yi }| .

The formalization reuses mathlib ’s Hamming-distance defi-nition and exposes it under the project namespace as dist .The codomain is N, not R. This is the natural form for the elementary covering-code arguments: balls are defined by inequalities between natural numbers, exact-distance layers are finite sets, and all cardinality estimates remain in natural-number arithmetic. The basic distance API consists of the following facts: 

dh(x, x) = 0,

dh(x, y) = dh(y, x),

dh(x, z) ≤ dh(x, y) + dh(y, z),

dh(x, y) ≤ | ι|,

dh(x, y) = 0 ⇐⇒ x = y.

For q-ary words of length n, the bound dh(x, y) ≤ | ι| spe-cializes to dh(x, y) ≤ n. In the formalization these facts are recorded by the expected self-distance, symmetry, triangle, cardinality, and zero-distance lemmas. Together they provide the metric facts needed in the rest of the paper, while keeping the primary interface natural-number-valued. 

2.4 Balls and exact-distance layers 

For a center word c and a radius r ∈ N, the closed Hamming ball of radius r around c is 

Br(c) = { x : dh(x, c) ≤ r }.

This is the geometric object from which covering codes are defined. The Lean definition ball is the direct set of words Formal Foundations and Proof-Carrying Certificates for q-ary Covering Codes in Lean 4 — 5/20 

satisfying the distance inequality. Consequently, membership in a ball is exactly the distance inequality: 

x ∈ Br(c) ⇐⇒ dh(x, c) ≤ r.

The elementary ball API contains the following facts: (i) the center belongs to every ball around itself, c ∈ Br(c);(ii) radius-zero balls are singletons, B0(c) = {c};(iii) balls are monotone in the radius, so r ≤ s implies Br(c) ⊆

Bs(c);(iv) if r ≥ | ι| (which equals n in the q-ary case), then Br(c)

is the whole word space. It is also useful to refer informally to exact-distance layers. For i ∈ N, write 

Si(c) = { x : dh(x, c) = i }.

Then 

Br(c) = 

> min (r,n)
> [
> i=0

Si(c)

in the q-ary length-n case. This shell notation is used only to explain the ball-volume formula below. The notation Br(c) and Si(c) agrees with the usual Ham-ming ball and shell notation used in covering-code theory; see Cohen et al. [4, Sec. 2.1]. 

2.5 Cardinalities and ball volume 

When all coordinate alphabets are finite, the dependent word space has cardinality 

# ∏

> i:ι

βi = ∏

> i:ι

|βi|.

For the uniform q-ary case this becomes 

|Hq(n)| = | Fin n → Fin q| = qn.

This identity is used repeatedly: it gives the size of the full-space code, the cardinality of the search space, and the right-hand side of the sphere-covering bound. For a fixed center in Hq(n), the number of words at dis-tance exactly i is 

|Si(c)| =

ni



(q − 1)i.

Indeed, one first chooses the i coordinates at which the word differs from the center and then chooses one of the q − 1non-center symbols in each chosen coordinate. Summing over exact-distance layers gives the q-ary Hamming-ball volume 

Vq(n, r) = 

> min (r,n)

# ∑

> i=0

ni



(q − 1)i (q ≥ 1).

This classical formula is the standard volume formula for q-ary Hamming balls; see Cohen et al. [4, Sec. 2.1]. The Lean function qaryBallVolume implements this closed form as a total expression in q, n, r and uses natural-number truncated subtraction, so q − 1 = 0 when q = 0 . For q ≥ 1 the two agree. The linked cardinality theorem states that the formula equals the size of an actual finite ball. Equivalently, for every center 

c : Fin n → Fin q,

|Br(c)| = Vq(n, r).

This theorem is used later to derive the sphere-covering lower bound. The theorem is stated for an actual center word, so edge cases such as q = 0, n > 0 are handled by the type itself: in that case there is no center to quantify over. The preceding definitions separate the finite Hamming-space layer from the covering-code layer introduced next. The next section adds codes, covering predicates, and certificate-style exact covering-number statements on top of these defini-tions. 

## 3. Covering Codes and Covering Numbers 

Section 2 fixed words, Hamming distance, and balls. This sec-tion adds the formal predicates used to state covering claims. The main predicate says that a chosen set of centers covers the ambient space at a given radius. The q-ary covering number is then represented, in the current formalization, by a certificate-style exactness predicate rather than by an immediately chosen noncomputable minimization operator. This distinction is intentional. Mathematically, it is con-venient to write Kq(n, r) for the minimum size of a radius-r

cover of (Fin q)n. In a theorem prover, however, many ele-mentary results are naturally proved by giving an upper-bound witness and a lower-bound argument. The formal predicate used here records precisely these two pieces of information. Thus a statement such as Kq(n, r) = k is represented first as the existence of a finite cover of size k, together with a proof that every finite cover has size at least k.

3.1 Covering codes as subsets of Hamming space 

Using the notation of Section 2, fix a finite word space 

W = ∏

> i:ι

βi

with Hamming distance dh. For C ⊆ W and r ∈ N, the formal covering predicate is Covers (C, r) :⇐⇒ ∀x ∈ W, ∃c ∈ C, dh(x, c) ≤ r.

Thus C is a radius-r covering code exactly when Covers (C, r)

holds. Equivalently, 

W = [

> c∈C

Br(c),

where Br(c) is the closed Hamming ball of radius r centered at c. This union-of-balls view is the form used in the sphere-covering bound, while the existential view is usually the most convenient one for Lean proofs. Formal Foundations and Proof-Carrying Certificates for q-ary Covering Codes in Lean 4 — 6/20 

Specializing W to Hq(n), the same condition becomes Covers q(C, n, r) :⇐⇒ ∀x : Hq(n), ∃c ∈ C, dh(x, c) ≤ r.

This predicate is uniform in q, n, and r. No assumption such as q > 0 or n > 0 is built in. This is useful because edge cases, for example the empty alphabet or the length-zero word space, can be handled by ordinary finite-type reasoning rather than by separate informal conventions. 

3.2 Set-valued and finset-valued predicates 

The formalization exposes two covering predicates: Covers 

for set-valued codes and CoversFinset for finset-valued codes. Both are direct translations of the mathematical state-ment above, using Lean’s membership notation and proposi-tional connectives. The set-valued predicate is useful for general inclusion arguments. For example, if C ⊆ D and C covers at radius r,then D also covers at radius r. The finset-valued predicate is useful whenever cardinalities are part of the statement, as in exact covering-number results and computational certificates. The two predicates agree after coercing a finset to a set; this is the lemma coversFinset_iff_coe . It lets the for-malization move freely between set-style and finset-style rea-soning. In particular, theorems whose proofs are conceptually about containment can be stated for sets, while theorems whose conclusions involve |C| can be stated for finsets. 

3.3 Elementary interpretation as set cover 

For fixed q, n, r, every possible center c ∈ Hq(n) determines a subset of the ambient space, namely its ball Br(c). Finding a smallest radius-r covering code is therefore exactly the problem of selecting as few of these balls as possible so that their union is the whole space: 

Hq(n) = [

> c∈C

Br(c).

This is a finite instance of the standard set-cover formula-tion [4]: the universe is Hq(n), and the candidate subsets are the balls {Br(c) : c ∈ Hq(n)}. Here we use this only as an elementary modeling viewpoint, not as a complexity-theoretic hardness claim. The set-cover viewpoint is not needed to de-fine covering codes, but it clarifies two later parts of the paper. First, the sphere-covering lower bound arises by comparing the cardinality of the full space with the total size of the balls selected by a code. Second, computational upper-bound certifi-cates are simply explicit choices of centers whose associated balls cover all words. This paper uses the set-cover perspective only at the el-ementary level. More sophisticated solver-based certificates, symmetry reductions, and integer-programming or SAT en-codings are deliberately left for future work; Section 9 records the basic computational interface. 

3.4 The q-ary covering number 

The introduction used the standard notation Kq(n, r) for the least size of a radius-r covering code in Hq(n):

Kq(n, r) = min { | C| : C ⊆ Hq(n), C is an r-cover }.

This is standard notation [4, Sec. 2.1]. The Lean development does not make this minimum function the primary formal object. Its certificate interface uses linked predicates for upper and lower bounds, together with exactness. The full-space construction gives the immediate upper bound 

Kq(n, r) ≤ | Hq(n)| = qn.

If r ≥ n, then a single word covers the entire q-ary Hamming space, because every two length-n words have distance at most n. Under the nonemptiness assumption Hq(n)̸ = ∅, this gives 

Kq(n, r) = 1 (r ≥ n).

These are elementary examples of the upper-bound/lower-bound pattern used throughout the formalization. 

3.5 Certificate-style exactness 

Instead of making a noncomputable definition of Kq(n, r) the central formal object, the current formalization uses an exact-ness predicate. For a fixed ambient word type, the predicate KSpec (r, k)

means that k is the exact minimum size of a radius-r cover. It is defined by the conjunction of an upper-bound certificate and a lower-bound theorem: KSpec (r, k) :⇐⇒ ∃C, |C| = k, C is an r-cover ,

and for every finite D,

D is an r-cover ⇒ k ≤ | D|.

The corresponding Lean definition is:               

> def KSpec (r k : N) : Prop :=
> ∃C : Finset (Word ιβ), C.card = k ∧
> CoversFinset C r ∧∀D : Finset (Word ιβ), CoversFinset D r →k≤
> D.card

The q-ary specialization QaryKSpec makes all four numerical parameters explicit. Thus a Lean theorem of type QaryKSpec q n r k corresponds to the mathematical assertion Kq(n, r) = 

k.This representation has two practical advantages. First, it matches the usual structure of covering-code proofs: an explicit code proves Kq(n, r) ≤ k, and a lower-bound argu-ment proves Kq(n, r) ≥ k. Second, it avoids forcing early design decisions about a global covering-number function, for example whether to define it by Nat.find , by a finite minimum over a finset of candidate cardinalities, or by an Formal Foundations and Proof-Carrying Certificates for q-ary Covering Codes in Lean 4 — 7/20 

order-theoretic infimum. Such a function can be added later and proved equivalent to KSpec ; the present formalization only needs the certificate form. The two conjuncts of KSpec are also exposed as stan-dalone predicates. The predicate KUpper (r, k) expresses the upper bound Kq(n, r) ≤ k: there exists a finite radius-r cov-ering code of size at most k. The predicate KLower (r, k) ex-presses the lower bound Kq(n, r) ≥ k: every finite radius-r

covering code has size at least k. Their Lean definitions are:                                  

> def KUpper (r k:N) : Prop :=
> ∃C:Finset (Word ιβ), C.card ≤k∧CoversFinset Crdef KLower (r k:N) : Prop :=
> ∀C:Finset (Word ιβ), CoversFinset C r →k≤C. card

The three predicates are connected by linked projection, com-bination, and uniqueness lemmas. The combination lemma is the key result: an upper-bound witness satisfies |C| ≤ k, while the lower-bound theorem applied to the same code forces 

k ≤ | C|, so |C| = k follows by antisymmetry. The uniqueness lemma confirms that the certificate predicate behaves like a numerical covering-number value: two exact certificates for the same radius must agree on their value. The upper- and lower-bound predicates also satisfy linked monotonicity and antitonicity lemmas. Their q-ary specializations make all four parameters explicit, in the same style as QaryKSpec .

3.6 Examples of exactness statements 

The elementary exact values proved later in the paper are nat-urally expressed using KSpec and QaryKSpec . For example, the zero-radius theorem says that every word must be selected as a codeword: 

Kq(n, 0) = qn.

In certificate form, the linked general theorem states that the whole finite word space is the unique minimum-size radius-zero cover. The upper-bound witness is the full word space, and the lower-bound proof shows that a radius-zero cover must contain every word. Another example is the near-diameter theorem: 

Kq(n, n − 1) = q (n ≥ 1).

The corresponding linked Lean theorem has the expected  

> QaryKSpec

conclusion. The upper-bound witness is the code of constant q-ary words, while the lower bound shows that every radius-(n − 1) cover must contain at least q words. This theorem illustrates why the certificate-style API is convenient: the proof object contains both the construction and the opti-mality argument. 

3.7 Specializations and naming discipline 

Some classical problems are obtained by fixing the alphabet size and radius. For example, the ternary radius-one problem is the specialization K3(n, 1). It may be useful to introduce an abbreviation for such a specialization in examples or in a later module, but the core formalization does not depend on doing so. The formal library is organized around arbitrary q, n, and 

r, and the q-ary specialization itself is only a specialization of the more general finite-word interface. This naming discipline matters for the scope of the pa-per. The first goal is not to formalize one named application, but to build a reusable foundation for finite Hamming-space covering codes. Application-specific terminology can then be layered on top without changing the underlying definitions. The next section records elementary consequences of these definitions: monotonicity in the radius, full-space and singleton covers, zero-radius exactness, and near-diameter ex-actness. These results are mathematically simple, but they are important tests that the formal interface has the right shape. 

## 4. Elementary General Theorems 

The previous two sections introduced the finite Hamming-space interface and the covering-code predicates. This section records the first general theorems built on top of that interface. None of the results is intended to be mathematically surprising. Their role is foundational: they test that the definitions have the right shape, establish the standard edge cases, and provide small reusable lemmas for later bounds and constructions. There are two kinds of statements in this section. The first kind concerns the behavior of balls and covers under changes of radius. These are structural lemmas used throughout the formalization. The second kind packages elementary exact values of covering numbers in certificate form. These exact values are simple, but they are important because they ex-ercise both halves of the exactness predicate introduced in Section 3.5: an explicit covering code and a proof that no smaller code can cover. 

4.1 Ball lemmas 

The following lemmas are immediate consequences of the ball definition from Section 2.4 and the basic Hamming-distance API. Ball membership is just the defining distance inequality: 

x ∈ Br(c) ⇐⇒ dh(x, c) ≤ r.

The Lean simp lemma is mem_ball_iff . The same file proves that the center is contained in every ball around it-self ( center_mem_ball ), that radius-zero balls are single-tons ( ball_zero ), and that balls are monotone in the radius (ball_subset_ball_of_le ): 

c ∈ Br(c), B0(c) = {c}, r ≤ s ⇒ Br(c) ⊆ Bs(c).

These lemmas are small, but they are the local facts that make later covering proofs readable. For example, radius mono-tonicity of covers is simply ball monotonicity expressed in the existential form of the covering predicate. Formal Foundations and Proof-Carrying Certificates for q-ary Covering Codes in Lean 4 — 8/20 

4.2 Radius monotonicity of covers 

If a code covers at radius r, then it covers at every larger radius. For a set-valued code C ⊆ W , the statement is 

r ≤ s and Covers (C, r) =⇒ Covers (C, s).

The formalization provides both a linked set-valued the-orem and a linked finset-valued theorem. The finset-valued theorem is obtained by transporting the set-valued theorem through the equivalence between the two covering predicates after coercing a finset to a set. Mathematically, this lemma is the source of the usual antitonicity of covering numbers in the radius: 

r ≤ s =⇒ Kq(n, s) ≤ Kq(n, r).

In the certificate-style API used here, the theorem is most directly used as an upper-bound transfer: a radius-r covering certificate immediately gives a radius-s covering certificate of the same size. A global noncomputable covering-number function can later expose the displayed inequality as a named theorem. A closely related monotonicity principle concerns the code itself rather than the radius: adding codewords cannot destroy the covering property. If C ⊆ D and C is an r-cover, then D is also an r-cover. This lemma is not mathematically difficult, but it is a useful companion to radius monotonicity because many constructions enlarge or transform existing codes. 

4.3 Full-space covers 

The simplest covering code is the whole ambient space. Let W

be any finite word space. The full-space code covers at every radius: CoversFinset (W, r).

The linked Lean theorem is stated using the universal finset. In the q-ary case this gives the elementary upper bound 

Kq(n, r) ≤ | Hq(n)| = qn.

This upper bound is usually far from sharp, but it has two important formal uses. First, it shows that the family of finite covering codes is nonempty whenever one wants to define 

Kq(n, r) as a minimum. Second, it provides the upper-bound half of the radius-zero exactness theorem. 

4.4 Large-radius covers 

The next elementary observation is that the maximum possi-ble Hamming distance between two words is the number of coordinates. If |ι| denotes the cardinality of the coordinate type, then 

dh(x, y) ≤ | ι|

for all x, y ∈ W . Consequently, a single center covers the whole word space at radius |ι|:

{c} is a |ι|-cover .

The linked Lean theorem formalizes this singleton cover. By radius monotonicity, the same singleton covers at every larger radius (large-radius version). There is also a version for arbi-trary nonempty codes; its proof chooses one element c ∈ C

and ignores all other codewords. Specialized to Hq(n), the coordinate type is Fin n, so |ι| =

n. Hence, whenever the ambient space is nonempty and r ≥ n,one codeword is enough: 

Kq(n, r) = 1 if Hq(n)̸ = ∅ and r ≥ n.

The nonemptiness hypothesis is essential in a fully formal statement. If the ambient space is empty, then the empty code already covers vacuously, so the exact minimum is 0, not 1.For q-ary spaces, Hq(n) is nonempty exactly when q > 0 or 

n = 0. The same observation can also be stated geometrically: for any center c and any radius r ≥ | ι|, the ball Br(c) is the whole word space. The formalization currently uses the equivalent covering-code formulation because it is the form needed for exactness certificates. 

4.5 Zero-radius exactness 

At radius zero, a codeword covers only itself. Therefore a radius-zero covering code must contain every word of the ambient space. In the q-ary case this gives the exact value 

Kq(n, 0) = qn.

The corresponding classical q-ary theory records the triv-ial values Kq(n, 0) = qn, Kq(n, n) = 1 , and the near-diameter value Kq(n, n − 1) = q under the usual nonempty-alphabet convention; see Cohen et al. [4, Sec. 3.7]. The Lean interface uses natural-number parameters throughout, so the boundary cases are part of the formal statements rather than informal side conditions. Table 1 summarizes the conventions and the corresponding Lean names. The linked key formal lemma characterizes radius-zero covers by containment of the universal finset. This provides the lower-bound half of the exactness certificate. The linked exactness theorem is packaged directly in cer-tificate form. The upper-bound witness is Finset.univ , the finset of all words. The lower-bound part uses the zero-radius characterization above: if D is any radius-zero cover, then it contains every word, and therefore 

|W | ≤ | D|.

This theorem is a useful example of the intended proof pattern for exact covering numbers. The construction and the lower bound are separate arguments, but the KSpec theorem combines them into a single machine-checkable certificate of exactness. 

4.6 Length-zero and length-one consequences 

Several edge cases follow immediately from the large-radius and zero-radius results. They are worth spelling out because Formal Foundations and Proof-Carrying Certificates for q-ary Covering Codes in Lean 4 — 9/20                                                                                                 

> Case Formal behavior Lean declarations All q,n,r∈NNo positivity assumption is built into the q-ary predicates; the word space is the finite type Fin n→Fin q.
> QaryWord ,QaryKSpec ,QaryKUpper ,
> QaryKLower
> q=0The word space is nonempty exactly when n=0. For n>0, covering conditions over the empty space are vacuous, and lower bound 0is the database fallback.
> qaryWord nonempty iff ,zeroLower valid ,
> trivialUpper valid
> r=0Exact for all q,n:Kq(n,0) = qn. This includes the empty-space value
> K0(n,0) = 0 for n>0 and Kq(0,0) = 1.
> covers zero iff univ subset ,
> qaryKSpec zero radius
> n=0There is one empty word, so the exact value is Kq(0,r) = 1for every r. This follows from zero-radius exactness at r=0and from the large-radius source bounds for r≥0.
> qaryWord nonempty iff ,
> qaryKSpec zero radius ,
> largeRadiusLower valid ,
> largeRadiusUpper valid
> r≥nA singleton covers whenever the word space has a center, giving exact value 1for n=0or q>0. For q=0,n>0, the space is empty and the trivial upper/lower bounds give value 0.
> singleton covers of card le ,
> largeRadiusLower valid ,
> largeRadiusUpper valid
> r=n−1Exact for all qwhen 1≤n:Kq(n,n−1) = q. The n=0case is not part of this theorem and is handled by the radius-zero case.
> qaryKSpec radius nMinusOne ,
> radiusNMinusOneLower valid ,
> radiusNMinusOneUpper valid

Table 1. Boundary cases included by the all-natural-number q-ary interface. they prevent hidden informal assumptions about nonempty alphabets or positive word lengths. For length zero, the q-ary Hamming space contains exactly one word: the empty function from the empty coordinate type to the alphabet. This remains true for q = 0, because there is a unique function from the empty type to Fin 0. Thus 

|Hq(0)| = q0 = 1for every q, including q = 0. Since the only word is at distance zero from itself, one codeword covers for every radius: 

Kq(0, r) = 1.

The nonemptiness requirement in the large-radius singleton theorem is therefore satisfied at n = 0 , so this agrees with both zero-radius exactness and the large-radius result. For length one, radius zero requires all symbols: 

Kq(1, 0) = q.

For positive radius, one selected symbol covers every one-letter word, provided the q-ary space is nonempty: 

Kq(1, r) = 1 (q ≥ 1, r ≥ 1).

If q = 0 and n = 1, the ambient word space is empty and the exact covering number is 0. These degenerate cases are not exceptions to the formal definitions; they are ordinary con-sequences of representing q-ary words as functions Fin n →

Fin q.

4.7 The near-diameter value 

The most substantial elementary exact value in this initial formalization is the near-diameter case 

Kq(n, n − 1) = q (n ≥ 1).

Common informal presentations often state this for q ≥ 2, but the formal theorem does not need that hypothesis. For q = 0and n ≥ 1, the ambient space is empty and the value is 0 = q;for q = 1, the ambient space has one word and the value is 1 = q.The upper bound uses the finite set of constant words. Its linked cardinality and covering lemmas establish the construc-tion. The lower bound is the linked missing-symbol theorem: any radius-(n − 1) cover has at least q codewords. Combining these two parts gives the exact linked certificate. This theo-rem is a useful first nontrivial test of the linked QaryKSpec 

interface. These elementary results are deliberately modest. Their importance is that they establish the basic proof pattern used throughout the rest of the paper: define a finite code, prove that it covers, and separately prove that any covering code must have at least a certain size. The next section applies the same pattern at a larger scale by counting the union of Hamming balls around an arbitrary covering code. 

## 5. Hamming Balls and the Sphere-Covering Bound 

This section contains the two main analytical results of the formalization. The first is a proof of the closed-form ball volume formula introduced in Section 2.5, which is needed as a lemma for everything that follows. The second is the classical sphere-covering lower bound, which asserts that the number of codewords in any covering code is at least 

⌈qn/Vq(n, r)⌉. Together these two results form the analytical core of the library and the primary input to the certified lower-bound database described in Section 9. 

5.1 Proof of the ball volume formula 

Section 2.5 introduced the q-ary Hamming-ball volume 

Vq(n, r) = 

> min (r,n)

# ∑

> i=0

ni



(q − 1)i.Formal Foundations and Proof-Carrying Certificates for q-ary Covering Codes in Lean 4 — 10/20 

The linked theorem qaryBallVolume_eq_card formalizes the classical formula |Br(c)| = Vq(n, r) [4, Sec. 2.1] by double induction on n and r. The base cases n = 0 and r = 0 are immediate. The inductive step is the usual first-coordinate split. A word in Br+1(c) either agrees with c in the first coordinate and leaves a tail in Br+1(ctail ), or differs there and chooses one of the q − 1 non-center symbols while leaving a tail in Br(ctail ).Thus the ball cardinalities satisfy 

|Br+1(c)| = |Br+1(ctail )| + ( q − 1) |Br(ctail )|.

The corresponding arithmetic recurrence is:   

> lemma qaryBallVolume_succ_succ (q n r : N) : qaryBallVolume q (n + 1) (r + 1) = qaryBallVolume q n (r + 1) + (q - 1) * qaryBallVolume q n r

The main formal nuisance is that the two sums naturally have different upper bounds because of min (r, n). The Lean proof rewrites the volume formula to an equivalent sum over 0, . . . , r +1, using  ni

 = 0 for i > n; after that, Pascal’s identity aligns the summands and the induction hypothesis matches the ball recurrence. Positivity of qaryBallVolume then follows from the i = 0 summand and is used in the ceiling-division form of the sphere-covering bound below. 

5.2 The sphere-covering lower bound 

The sphere-covering lower bound is the standard counting ar-gument for covering codes: each codeword covers at most 

Vq(n, r) words, so a radius-r covering code must contain enough codewords to cover all qn words [4, Sec. 2.1]. The formal statement avoids natural-number division: the bound is phrased as a product inequality. 

Intuition. Let C ⊆ Hq(n) be a finite covering code of radius r. Each codeword c ∈ C is associated with a ball Br(c),and the balls together cover all qn words. Even if the balls were pairwise disjoint — the most favorable case for the code — they could account for at most |C| · Vq(n, r) words in total. Since they must account for all qn words: 

qn ≤ | C| · Vq(n, r).

In practice the balls overlap, which means a given word may be covered multiple times. The inequality is therefore conser-vative: it gives a lower bound, not an equality. 

Formal statement. The theorem is phrased as an inequal-ity between qn and the product |C| · Vq(n, r):           

> theorem sphere_covering_bound {q n r : N}(C :Finset (QaryWord q n)) (hC : CoversFinset C r ):qˆn≤C.card * qaryBallVolume q n r

Formal proof. The proof follows the intuitive argument as a single calc chain over finset cardinalities:             

> calc qˆn=Finset.univ.card := ... _≤(C.biUnion (fun c => ballFinset c r)).card := Finset.card_le_card hcover _≤Finset.sum C (fun c => (ballFinset c r).card) := Finset.card_biUnion_le _ = Finset.sum C (fun c => qaryBallVolume q n r) := Finset.sum_congr rfl (...) _ = C.card * qaryBallVolume q n r := by rw [Finset.sum_const, smul_eq_mul]

5.3 Lower bound via ceiling division 

The product inequality qn ≤ | C| · Vq(n, r) can be rearranged to |C| ≥ ⌈ qn/Vq(n, r)⌉, giving an explicit computable lower bound. The ceiling-division version is the natural integer-arithmetic form of the same sphere-covering bound. In natural-number arithmetic, ceiling division is defined as follows: 

l ab

m

= a + b − 1

b (b > 0),

where the division on the right is natural-number floor division. The Lean definition is:    

> def natCeilDiv (a b : N) : N:= (a + b - 1) / b

The convention natCeilDiv a 0 = 0 is adopted for the zero-denominator case, which never arises in the sphere-covering application because Vq(n, r) ≥ 1 always holds. The key arithmetic lemma relating ceiling division to prod-uct inequalities is:       

> theorem natCeilDiv_le_of_le_mul {a b c : N}(hb : 0 < b) (h : a ≤c * b) : natCeilDiv a b ≤c

This says that if a ≤ c · b and b > 0 , then ⌈a/b⌉ ≤ c. The proof is a short calculation in natural-number arithmetic, using the standard characterization of strict inequalities for natural-number division and the fact that ⌈a/b⌉ − 1 < a/b.The sphere-covering lower bound is encapsulated as a computable function:    

> def sphereLower (q n r : N) : N:= natCeilDiv (q ˆ n) (qaryBallVolume q n r)

Its validity as a lower-bound certificate is established by:  

> theorem sphereLower_valid (q n r : N) : QaryKLower q n r (sphereLower q n r)

The proof applies the natural-number ceiling-division lemma with a := qn, b := Vq(n, r), and c := |C| for an arbitrary cover-ing code C. Positivity of the denominator comes from the ball-volume positivity lemma, and the product inequality comes from the sphere-covering bound. Thus sphereLower valid 

is a direct consequence of the two main results of this section. The results in this section are mathematically standard. Their value in the formalization is that they provide a machine-checked bridge between the explicit ball-volume formula and the certificate-style lower-bound predicates used by the database. The next section applies the same pattern at the construction level by combining covering codes via a product operation. Formal Foundations and Proof-Carrying Certificates for q-ary Covering Codes in Lean 4 — 11/20 

## 6. Elementary Constructions 

This section presents the product construction for covering codes. The idea is classical: given two codes, one covering a left coordinate block and one covering a right coordinate block, their Cartesian product covers the combined block at the sum of the two radii. This is the formal version of the standard direct-sum construction for covering codes, in which covering radii add under products; see Cohen et al. [4, Thm. 3.2.1]. The formalization states and proves this in the general setting of abstract coordinate types, with no restriction to uniform alphabets or q-ary codes. The resulting theorem is then a direct building block for the database and for future constructions that involve lengthened or concatenated codes. The section follows the structure established in earlier sections. First, the notion of a product word over a sum of coordinate types is introduced. Second, the additivity of Ham-ming distance across the two coordinate blocks is established. Third, the product code is defined and the main covering theorem is proved. 

6.1 Sum-type words 

Let ι and κ be finite coordinate types, with alphabet families 

β1 : ι → Type and β2 : κ → Type . A word over the disjoint union ι ⊕ κ assigns a symbol to each coordinate in ι and to each coordinate in κ. Here and throughout this section, ⊕ de-notes the type-level disjoint union of coordinate types, Lean’s 

Sum , not XOR or a vector-space/group operation. Given a word x1 over ι and a word x2 over κ, their concatenation is the word sumWord (x1, x2) : (s : ι ⊕ κ) → (β1 ⊕ β2)( s)

defined by sumWord (x1, x2)( inl i) = x1(i),

sumWord (x1, x2)( inr j) = x2( j).

Here inl and inr are the two constructors of the sum type 

ι ⊕ κ, and the combined alphabet at position s is the family 

Sum .elim β1 β2 s which returns β1i when s = inl i and β2 j

when s = inr j.The Lean definition mirrors this case analysis directly:                       

> def sumWord (x1 : (i : iota) →beta1 i) (x2 : (j : kappa) →beta2 j) : (s :Sum iota kappa) →Sum.elim beta1 beta2 s := fun s=> match swith |Sum.inl i=> x1 i |Sum.inr j=> x2 j

Conversely, every sum word decomposes into its left projec-tion x1(i) := x(inl i) and its right projection x2( j) := x(inr j),and then reassembles as x = sumWord (x1, x2). This reassem-bly identity is proved by pointwise case analysis on the sum type and plays a central role in the main covering theorem. 

6.2 Additivity of Hamming distance 

The key structural property of the product construction is that Hamming distance decomposes additively along the left and right coordinate blocks. Formally, for any two sum words, 

dh(sumWord (x1, x2), sumWord (y1, y2)) = dh(x1, y1) + dh(x2, y2).

This is the content of the lemma 

> lemma hammingDist_sumWord (x1 y1 : Word iota beta1) (x2 y2 : Word kappa beta2) : hammingDist (sumWord x1 x2) (sumWord y1 y2) = hammingDist x1 y1 + hammingDist x2 y2

The proof decomposes the filter over ι ⊕ κ that defines Hamming distance into two disjoint parts. Write ∆(u, v) = {t |

u(t)̸ = v(t) }, and let inl [−] and inr [−] denote images under the two sum constructors. Then 

∆(sumWord (x1, x2), sumWord (y1, y2)) = inl [∆(x1, y1)] ∪ inr [∆(x2, y2)] .

The two image sets are disjoint because inl and inr are disjoint constructors. Applying the inclusion-exclusion rule for dis-joint finite sets reduces the cardinality of the union to the sum of the two cardinalities. Since the left image is in bijection (via inl ) with the set of differing positions in x1 and y1, and similarly for the right image, the cardinalities equal dh(x1, y1)

and dh(x2, y2) respectively, which gives the stated identity. In the Lean proof, the filter decomposition is established by a finset extensionality argument using case analysis on 

inl /inr . Disjointness is proved by noting that an element can-not simultaneously be in the image of inl and the image of inr .The cardinality of each image under an injective map equals the cardinality of the source, which is recorded by 

Finset.card image of injective .

Together, these steps give the distance equality in a short rw 

chain. 

6.3 The product code 

Given two finite codes C1 ⊆ Word ι β 1 and C2 ⊆ Word κ β 2,their product code is the set of all concatenations: 

C1 ×C2 := { sumWord (c1, c2) : c1 ∈ C1, c2 ∈ C2 }.

In Lean, the product code is defined as the image of the Carte-sian product under sumWord:   

> def productCode (C1 : Finset (Word iota beta1)) (C2 : Finset (Word kappa beta2)) : Finset (Word (Sum iota kappa) (Sum.elim beta1 beta2)) := (C1 ×sC2).image (fun p => sumWord p.1 p.2)

The expression C1 ×s C2 denotes the finset Cartesian product, whose elements are pairs (c1, c2) with c1 ∈ C1 and c2 ∈ C2.The image operation applies sumWord to each pair, discard-ing duplicates. The resulting finset has cardinality at most Formal Foundations and Proof-Carrying Certificates for q-ary Covering Codes in Lean 4 — 12/20 

|C1| · | C2|, with equality when the mapping is injective on the Cartesian product. In the q-ary specialization, product codes are ordinary con-catenations: a code in length n1 and a code in length n2 embed into length n1 + n2 via the standard bijection between the sum of coordinate types and Fin (n1 +n2). The formalization works with the sum-type coordinate index directly, avoiding the need to state or apply any explicit bijection. 

6.4 Product covering theorem 

The main result of this section is the following. 

Product covering theorem. Let C1 be a finite radius-r1

covering code over ι and let C2 be a finite radius-r2 covering code over κ. Then the product code C1 ×C2 is a radius-(r1 +

r2) covering code over ι ⊕ κ.The Lean statement is:             

> theorem productCode_covers (C1 :Finset (Word iota beta1)) (C2 : Finset (Word kappa beta2)) (r1 r2 :Nat) (h1 :CoversFinset C1 r1) (h2 : CoversFinset C2 r2 ):CoversFinset (productCode C1 C2) (r1 + r2)

Proof. Let x : (s : ι ⊕ κ) → (β1 ⊕ β2)( s) be an arbitrary word. Define 

x1(i) := x(inl i) and x2( j) := x(inr j).

The reassembly identity gives x = sumWord (x1, x2). Since 

C1 covers at radius r1, there exists c1 ∈ C1 with dh(x1, c1) ≤

r1. Since C2 covers at radius r2, there exists c2 ∈ C2 with 

dh(x2, c2) ≤ r2.The product codeword sumWord (c1, c2) belongs to C1 ×

C2 because (c1, c2) ∈ C1 ×s C2 and the product code is its image. By the distance-additivity lemma, 

dh

 x, sumWord (c1, c2)

= dh

 sumWord (x1, x2), sumWord (c1, c2)

= dh(x1, c1) + dh(x2, c2) ≤ r1 + r2.

Since x was arbitrary, the product code covers at radius r1 + r2.The Lean proof follows this argument step by step. The decomposition of x is done by defining x1 and x2 as local let-bindings and proving the reassembly identity by funext with a case split on the sum type. Membership in the product code is reduced to the standard image/product membership lemmas. The distance bound uses the sum-word distance lemma and 

> Nat.add le add

.

Remark on tightness. The radius r1 + r2 in Theorem 6.4 is in general not tight. The product code has size at most 

|C1| · | C2| and radius r1 + r2; it is not generally optimal for the combined space and radius. The theorem is therefore most useful as a composition tool, not as a direct method for constructing optimal codes. This product construction is the representative fully gen-eral construction in the paper: define an operation on words, prove its distance behavior, turn it into a finset transformation, and derive the corresponding covering theorem. The next sec-tion uses the same certificate-oriented viewpoint for standard relations between neighboring covering-code parameters. 

## 7. Neighbor Relations and Structural Code Transformations 

Many standard covering-code arguments are relations between neighboring parameter triples. A proof of Kq(n, r) ≤ U or 

Kq(n, r) ≥ L can often be transported to a proof about a differ-ent triple (q′, n′, r′). For example, puncturing a length-eight ternary radius-one cover gives a length-seven radius-one cover of no larger size: extend a target word by one arbitrary coordi-nate, use the original cover, and delete the added coordinate again. The formalization packages such arguments as proof-carrying transformations of the linked upper-bound and lower-bound predicates. The important point is not the Lean syntax of each declaration, but the certified effect: applying a rela-tion theorem produces a new Lean proof that the transported number is a valid upper or lower bound. Table 2 summarizes the relation layer. The source links point to representative declarations; Appendix A gives a broader declaration map. The first seven rows are numerical relations: they trans-form only upper- or lower-bound certificates. These are the rules used by the database closure in Section 9. The remaining rows are structural rules. They need an explicit code together with side information about that code, such as a missing sym-bol, a forbidden pattern, a cover of deep holes, or a compatible coloring. Such information cannot be recovered from a bare numerical inequality Kq(n, r) ≤ U.

7.1 Indexed concatenation 

The concatenation rule is the most informative numerical rela-tion because its statement records more than a size inequality. It combines an outer cover over an alphabet of size Q with an explicit map from the Q outer symbols to q-ary inner blocks of length m. A hypothesis says that every q-ary block is within distance ρ of some indexed inner block. If the outer code cov-ers length N at radius R, then replacing each outer symbol by the corresponding inner block gives a q-ary code of length 

mN and radius 

Nρ + R(m − ρ).

The term Nρ pays for approximating each target block by an inner symbol. In the at most R blocks where the selected outer codeword differs from that symbol word, the block cost can rise from ρ to at most m, adding R(m − ρ).This theorem is intentionally stated with an explicit inner map rather than only a numerical certificate such as Kq(m, ρ) ≤

Q. The numerical certificate proves that some inner code ex-ists, but concatenation needs a fixed indexing of outer alphabet symbols by inner blocks. This is a typical formalization point: Formal Foundations and Proof-Carrying Certificates for q-ary Covering Codes in Lean 4 — 13/20                                                                                                  

> Rule family Certified effect Proof idea Source Radius monotonicity Kq(n,r)≤U⇒Kq(n,r+s)≤U; lower bounds move back from r+sto r.Hamming balls grow with the radius. radius rules Puncturing Kq(n,r)≤U⇒Kq(n−t,r)≤U, with a lower-bound converse. Delete tcoordinates; for the upper bound, fill deleted coordi-nates before using the original cover. length rules Free lengthening Kq(n,r)≤U⇒Kq(n+t,r)≤qtU, with lower bound divided by qtusing ceiling division. Append all possible suffixes to each codeword. free lengthening Dummy lengthening Kq(n,r)≤U⇒Kq(n+t,r+t)≤U, with a lower-bound converse. Append fixed coordinates and spend at most one radius unit per new coordinate. dummy lengthening Alphabet projection and expansion Project from qsymbols to a≤q, or expand from q
> symbols to Q≤sq with a factor sn.Use coordinatewise maps between finite alphabets and com-pare distances. alphabet rules Direct and repeated products Upper bounds multiply and radii add; repeated prod-ucts give Kq(mn ,mr )≤Um.Specialize Section 6.4 to q-ary coordinate blocks: concatenate independently covered coordinate blocks. product rules Block grouping and ungrouping Group m q -ary coordinates into one qm-ary coordinate, or ungroup with radius multiplied by m.Compare block Hamming distance with coordinate Hamming distance. block rules Concatenation An outer Q-ary cover and an indexed q-ary inner cover give a q-ary cover of length mN and radius Nρ+R(m−
> ρ).Approximate every target block by an inner symbol, then use the outer cover to control the blocks whose chosen symbols differ. concatenation Structural shortening Explicit missing-symbol, fixed-coordinate, or pattern-avoidance information can reduce both length and ra-dius. A forced disagreement consumes radius before the shortened coordinates are considered. shortening Hole filling A code covering at radius r, plus a cover of its deep holes at radius r−1, gives a smaller-radius cover. Use the union of the original code and the auxiliary hole-covering code. hole filling Colored product Matched color classes in two codes give a product code using only same-color pairs. For every target pair, choose one color that supplies both approximations. colored product

Table 2. Certified relation rules for transporting covering-code bounds. The table states the mathematical effect; each linked source declaration produces the corresponding Lean proof in the certificate interface. the certificate must carry the data that the construction ac-tually uses, not only the numerical bound suggested by the construction. 

7.2 Structural explicit-code rules 

Structural rules work from concrete codes. In the missing-symbol shortening rule, for example, no codeword uses sym-bol a at coordinate j. Any target with symbol a at j therefore disagrees with every codeword at that coordinate before the remaining coordinates are considered. Deleting coordinate j

removes this forced disagreement and reduces the covering radius by one. The pattern-avoidance version applies the same idea to several coordinates at once: if every codeword differs from a prescribed partial pattern in at least δ coordinates, those δ units of distance can be removed from the radius after deleting the pattern coordinates. Hole filling is another structural rule. If C already covers the space at radius r, the only obstruction to a radius-(r − 1)

cover is the finite set of words not covered by C at radius r − 1.A second code D that covers exactly those deep holes at radius 

r − 1 yields a radius-(r − 1) cover of size at most |C| + |D|.Colored products likewise require side information: for every target pair, the left and right approximations must be available with one shared color, so that their product codeword belongs to the same-color product. The relation layer changes the role of a certified database entry. A primitive bound can serve not only as a final re-ported result, but also as a seed from which further certified bounds are obtained by applying relation rules. The next sec-tion demonstrates how published explicit code data become primitive upper-bound certificates; Section 9 then explains how such certificates are registered and propagated by trace replay. 

## 8. Case Study: Formalizing Published Covering Codes 

This section demonstrates the end-to-end workflow for for-malizing explicit covering codes from the published literature. The endpoint of the section is a collection of ordinary L EAN 

theorems of type QaryKUpper ; their database registration is described separately in Section 9. 

8.1 Source paper 

Van Laarhoven, Aarts, van Lint, and Wille [8] proved three upper bounds for the football pool problem by exhibiting explicit covering codes: 

K3(6, 1) ≤ 73 , K3(7, 1) ≤ 186 , K3(8, 1) ≤ 486 .

All three bounds were obtained using simulated annealing. For n = 8, the search was carried out in a Blokhuis–Lam style setup involving a small set S and a matrix A; the authors then describe a systematic construction producing many distinct 486-element covering codes from that result. The codes were published as printed grid figures in the paper. 

8.2 Data extraction 

The code data were transcribed from the published figures and the Blokhuis–Lam style n = 8 construction in van Laarhoven et al. into packed arrays in the van Laarhoven source module. This transcription was an untrusted data-production step: it was AI-assisted and manually corrected, and is not treated as a reproducible part of the artifact. The checked artifact starts with the committed L EAN definitions of the finite sets. L EAN 

then verifies their cardinality and radius-one covering property from finite certificates. Thus the formal theorem depends on the machine-checked covering certificate, not on trusting the transcription process. Formal Foundations and Proof-Carrying Certificates for q-ary Covering Codes in Lean 4 — 14/20 

8.3 Lean encoding 

A naive encoding of 486 codewords as a finset literal hits Lean’s elaboration recursion depth limit. The solution is to represent each word as a single natural number via the ternary packing enc (w) = 

> n−1

# ∑

> i=0

wi · 3i

and store the codes as an Array N. The covering finset is then reconstructed by codeFromPacked from the packed arrays; the largest one begins at vanLaarhoven8Packed .This representation scales better for large explicit code data because it avoids large finset literals and elaboration recursion limits. The covering proof does not ask Lean to search for a nearby codeword from scratch. For each ambient word, the source stores a compact move certificate: either keep the word itself, or change one coordinate to one ternary value. Lean checks that the suggested move produces a packed word con-tained in the code. A checked lemma then turns the Boolean certificate pass into a CoversFinset proof. The cardinality proof is separate and uses the array length. The public decla-rations listed in Appendix A package the resulting finite sets, cardinality bounds, and covering proofs. 

8.4 Switchable finite proof mode and resource use 

The linked wrapper tactic closes the finite Boolean checks. By default it calls ordinary decide , so the resulting proof is replayed by Lean’s kernel reduction path. Setting the proof-mode option to native mode switches the same proof leaves to native decide . This is useful for development and mea-surement, but it uses Lean’s native compiled evaluator and therefore the trust boundary of Section 9.2. Table 3 reports file-level compile measurements for three expensive source files. Each file was checked by invoking Lean through Lake with one worker, a 400 GiB memory cap, profiling enabled, and the proof-mode option set either to kernel mode or to native mode. The runs were performed on a server with two Intel Xeon Gold 6438M sockets, 64 physical cores / 128 hardware threads, and 512 GiB of RAM. All six runs completed successfully with exit code 0 and no timeout. The numbers are wall-clock and maximum resident set size for whole-file checks, not per-theorem attributions. These measurements explain why both modes are useful. Kernel mode gives the stronger proof-replay story, but it can require hours and hundreds of GiB for the largest file-level checks in the present artifact. Native mode keeps the same finite certificate structure and is practical for routine devel-opment, but uses the native-evaluation trust boundary. The wall-clock times in Table 3 should be read as representative measurements rather than deterministic values; reruns on the same server can vary by several minutes for the longest kernel checks and by a few seconds for native checks. 

8.5 Certificate packaging 

Each explicit-code record bundles a finset code with its car-dinality bound and covering proof. The record projection  

> ExplicitQaryUpper.toUpper

extracts the corresponding  

> QaryKUpper

proof term. This completes the code-specific part of the formalization: the data extracted from the published figures has been reconstructed as a finite set of q-ary words and turned into machine-checked upper-bound certificates. The formal theorem asserts at most 486 codewords for the largest case; it does not certify row-for-row identity with the printed grid. 

8.6 What this demonstrates 

Three properties of the formalization workflow are illustrated by this case study. 

Independent verification of published results. The ex-traction step detected errors in the initial transcription of the printed figures. Machine verification provides a check on pub-lished results that are rarely read in full detail by later readers. 

Scalable Lean encoding. Packing codewords as natural numbers and reconstructing the finset by unpacking the stored array entries and applying List.toFinset avoids large fin-set literals and keeps the source file manageable. The same encoding can be reused for larger explicit q-ary codes, but it only addresses source-size and elaboration bottlenecks; the covering check itself still grows with the ambient space and the number of codewords. 

Finite proof modes. Computational upper-bound certifi-cates reduce to a covering check over a finite domain, which is decidable. The artifact source can replay the expensive finite proof leaves either through Lean’s ordinary decide 

path or, when the proof-mode option is enabled, through 

> native decide

. The latter is much faster for routine de-velopment, but it adds the trust assumption of Lean’s native compiled evaluation path. The general pattern is to keep the external search or transcription untrusted while Lean checks the resulting explicit certificate: extract the codewords, pack them, verify the finite covering predicate, and wrap the re-sult as an ExplicitQaryUpper . This should not be read as an automatic method for arbitrarily large covering-code instances. A lower bound from an exhaustive non-existence argument would require its own certificate format or formal argument and is future work rather than a consequence of this upper-bound wrapper. 

## 9. Certified Bounds and Proof-Carrying Database 

The preceding case study produced reusable Lean certificates from published covering codes. This section explains how such certificates are combined with formal relation rules to obtain further certified bounds. The point of the database is not merely to store numerical intervals. Each stored upper or lower bound carries a derivation trace whose replay con-structs a Lean proof of the corresponding QaryKUpper or  

> QaryKLower

statement. Formal Foundations and Proof-Carrying Certificates for q-ary Covering Codes in Lean 4 — 15/20                   

> Source file Kernel mode Native mode Wall time Max RSS Wall time Max RSS
> SmallExplicitUpper.lean 99.5 min 58.7 GiB 24.0 s 3.76 GiB
> SmallLowerBounds.lean 103.1 s 7.46 GiB 57.1 s 3.63 GiB
> VanLaarhoven1989.lean 77.1 min 357.0 GiB 37.7 s 3.75 GiB
> Table 3.

File-level resource measurements for the switchable finite proof mode. Kernel mode uses ordinary decide ; native mode uses native decide . The van Laarhoven row aggregates the K3(6, 1), K3(7, 1), and K3(8, 1) certificates in one source file. 

9.1 Certificate structure 

The database uses the same upper/lower certificate interface as the rest of the paper. Primitive leaves are ordinary Lean theo-rems: explicit codes give QaryKUpper proofs, while counting or non-existence arguments give QaryKLower proofs. Rela-tion rules from Section 7 transport such proofs between neigh-boring parameter triples. The trace layer records the sequence of primitive leaves and relation applications; replaying the trace gives the proof object used by the public query result. Table 4 gives the main declaration-level audit map for this certificate layer. A broader artifact map is given in Ap-pendix A. The precomputed table is an implementation of this certifi-cate structure over the parameter box 0 ≤ q ≤ 21 , 0 ≤ n ≤ 48 ,and 0 ≤ r ≤ 48 . It contains 52,822 entries serialized as Lean source in 212 generated chunks. The generator that writes these chunks is not verified. Its output is accepted as part of the artifact only because Lean type-checks the generated trace values and the public query interface bestBounds obtains proof fields by trace replay. 

9.2 Trust boundary 

The formalization separates checked proof objects from the computations and scripts that propose them. • Handwritten mathematical theorems, including the ball-volume formula, sphere-covering lower bound, product construction, small lower-bound arguments, and rela-tion theorems, are ordinary Lean declarations checked by the kernel. • Generated database entries are Lean source code con-taining explicit LowerTrace and UpperTrace values. The generator is not itself verified; the generated entries are checked by Lean through trace typing and replay. • External transcription and generation steps, including the transcription for the van Laarhoven case study and the table generator, are untrusted producers of candi-date data or Lean source. Their output contributes to a theorem only after the resulting Lean declarations are accepted. • Goals closed with native decide use Lean’s native compiled evaluator rather than kernel normalization for the finite decision procedure. The source supports both ordinary decide replay and this faster native mode for expensive finite leaves; only native proof-mode builds use this additional trust assumption. Thus the database is proof-carrying with respect to Lean trace replay, while the computations that found, generated, or accelerated some leaves remain part of the stated trusted infrastructure. 

9.3 Imported explicit codes 

The van Laarhoven certificates from Section 8.5 enter the database as primitive upper-bound leaves. The checked decla-rations n = 6 , n = 7 , and n = 8 prove K3(6, 1) ≤ 73 , K3(7, 1) ≤

186 , and K3(8, 1) ≤ 486 in the certificate interface. Once regis-tered as primitive sources, these theorems are propagated only through the generic relation rules; there is no van-Laarhoven-specific recursion in the closure layer. 

9.4 A two-block cyclic upper bound for Kq(3, 1)

One primitive upper source deserves separate mention because it is a uniform construction in q, not a list of isolated finite codes. Split the alphabet {0, . . . , q − 1} into two consecutive blocks of sizes 

a = ⌊q/2⌋, b = q − a = ⌈q/2⌉.

For a nonempty block of size m, index the block by Z/mZ

and use the m2 length-three codewords 

(i, i + j, j) (i, j ∈ Z/mZ),

with addition modulo m. Taking the union of this cyclic code in the two blocks gives at most a2 + b2 codewords. The covering argument is a small pigeonhole argument. Any target word (x0, x1, x2) has at least two coordinates in the same block. If these are positions 0 and 1 , choose i = x0 and 

j = x1 − x0 inside that block; if they are positions 0 and 2,choose i = x0 and j = x2; and if they are positions 1 and 2,choose j = x2 and i = x1 − x2. In each case the corresponding cyclic codeword agrees with the target in two coordinates and is therefore within Hamming distance one. The Lean theorem twoBlockCyclic331Upper_valid 

proves, for every q, the certificate 

Kq(3, 1) ≤ (q/2)2 + ( q − q/2)2.

Here q/2 is Lean’s natural-number floor division, so the two block sizes are ⌊q/2⌋ and ⌈q/2⌉. Thus the right-hand side is Formal Foundations and Proof-Carrying Certificates for q-ary Covering Codes in Lean 4 — 16/20              

> Claim Lean declarations File Trust boundary Upper, lower, and exact covering-number cer-tificates
> KUpper ,KLower ,KSpec ,
> KSpec.ofUpperLower CoveringCodes/CoveringNumber.lean Handwritten Lean; ker-nel checked. Trace replay constructs bound proofs UpperTrace.valid ,LowerTrace.valid CoveringCodes/Database/Trace.lean Handwritten Lean; ker-nel checked. Generated query results carry proof fields and are internally consistent
> BestBounds ,BestBounds.consistent ,
> bestBounds ,bestBounds_consistent CoveringCodes/Database/Defs.lean ,
> CoveringCodes/Database/GeneratedAPI. lean
> Generated traces plus checked replay. Explicit finite codes become upper-bound cer-tificates
> ExplicitQaryUpper ,
> ExplicitQaryUpper.toUpper CoveringCodes/Database/ExplicitCode. lean
> Finite checks use the proof mode stated in Section 9.2. van Laarhoven bounds enter as checked upper-bound theorems
> vanLaarhoven6Upper_valid ,
> vanLaarhoven7Upper_valid ,
> vanLaarhoven8Upper_valid CoveringCodes/Database/Sources/ VanLaarhoven1989.lean
> Committed data checked by Lean; tran-scription is untrusted.

Table 4. Audit map for the proof-carrying database interface. 

⌈q2/2⌉. The artifact proves this as an upper bound for every q.It does not prove the corresponding lower bound, so it does not certify the exact value of Kq(3, 1) for all q. The comparison table agrees with this value for 2 ≤ q ≤ 21 , but that table is used only as untrusted comparison data, not as a proof input. 

9.5 Selected database certificates 

The database contains selected exact covering-number cer-tificates beyond the structural families of radius zero, large radius, and near diameter, and it also reports non-exact certi-fied intervals. These entries were useful development targets because they exercise both sides of the certificate interface: an explicit covering code or construction for the upper bound, and an independent lower-bound proof. Table 5 lists a com-pact sample of representative query results. Exact rows are written with =, while non-exact interval rows are written with 

∈ [L,U]. The examples are not an exhaustive inventory of the database; they were chosen to show exactness certificates, sparse-slice lower bounds, explicit upper-bound seeds, and automatic closure propagation. The concrete finite-code upper-bound seeds shown in Ta-ble 5 are checked by ordinary decide ; they do not rely on 

native decide . Sphere-covering exact rows pair those up-per bounds with the formal ball-volume lower bound. The parity-hole proof for K2(5, 1) splits a hypothetical six-word radius-one cover into even and odd centers and derives an un-covered parity class after a small finite check. The normalized-hole proof for K2(6, 2) translates any three centers so that one is zero, then checks that two remaining centers cannot cover all length-six binary words at radius two. For K3(3, 1), the overlap-counting lower-bound theorem formalizes the overlap count showing that four ternary radius-one balls in length three cover at most 26 of the 27 words. For K4(3, 1), the sparse-slice lower bound specializes a general length-three radius-one ar-gument: a sparse first-coordinate fiber forces many distinct last-two coordinate projections among the codewords. The provenance labels in the database name these proof mechanisms rather than external table references. This is in-tentional. External tables and local searches are useful for finding candidate triples and candidate codes, but the trusted artifact begins with the Lean definitions, the checked finite covering predicates, and the lower-bound theorems registered as primitive sources. 

9.6 Closure and query consistency 

The closure layer applies the certified relation rules to prim-itive sources until no bound in the bounded parameter box improves. The current generated table records 52,822 entries. A generated entry stores lower and upper traces, not just two natural numbers. When the public query bestBounds returns a BestBounds record, its lower proof and upper proof 

fields are obtained by replaying those traces. The proof of consistency is mathematical rather than an invariant of the table generator. The upper proof supplies a covering code C with |C| ≤ upper . The lower proof applies to this same covering code and gives lower ≤ | C|. Transitivity gives lower ≤ upper . Appendix B records one generated-table run and the resulting trace-constructor counts. 

9.7 Path toward solver certificates 

The same certificate interface can host computational certifi-cates. An upper bound from a SAT or integer-programming search can enter as an explicit code once Lean checks that the code covers the ambient space. A lower bound from an exhaustive non-existence search would enter as a named 

QaryKLower theorem, possibly through a dedicated certifi-cate wrapper. In both cases the database stores the resulting theorem as a primitive leaf and lets the certified relation rules propagate any derived bounds. 

## 10. Prior Art 

The mathematical theory underlying this work is classical. The monograph of Cohen, Honkala, Litsyn, and Lobstein remains the standard reference for covering codes, including basic bounds, constructions, puncturing arguments, products, and tables of known values [4]. Further work on q-ary upper bounds, the football-pool problem, and ternary covering codes provides many of the concrete constructions and numerical targets that motivate this formalization [9, 1, 2, 8]. Recent work of Gijswijt and Polak strengthens semidefinite lower-bound methods for covering codes [10]. The computational prior art is also substantial. Tables such as Keri’s database record best known bounds for many triples 

(q, n, r) and are indispensable source material for new formal Formal Foundations and Proof-Carrying Certificates for q-ary Covering Codes in Lean 4 — 17/20                                                                        

> Lower certificate Certified statement Upper certificate sphere-covering bound K2(3,1) = 2constant-symbol code, Kq(n,r)≤qwhen q·(n−r−1)<n
> binary parity-hole proof K2(5,1) = 7explicit binary radius-one code binary normalized-hole proof K2(6,2) = 4explicit binary radius-two code sphere-covering bound K2(7,1) = 16 binary Hamming code ternary overlap-counting proof K3(3,1) = 5explicit ternary radius-one code sphere-covering bound K3(4,1) = 9ternary Hamming code sparse-slice proof for Kq(3,1)K4(3,1) = 8explicit quaternary radius-one code sphere-covering bound K4(5,1) = 64 quaternary Hamming radius-one code sphere-covering bound K5(3,1)∈[10 ,13 ]explicit quinary radius-one code sphere-covering bound K6(4,1)∈[62 ,108 ]explicit senary radius-one seed propagated by free lengthening ×q1
> sparse-slice proof for Kq(3,1)K9(3,1)∈[36 ,41 ]explicit nonary radius-one code

Table 5. Selected exact and interval certificates reported by the generated database. External tables were used only as untrusted target-selection aids; the statements shown here are certified by Lean proofs and database trace replay, but the intervals are not claimed to be best known values. certificates [11]. These tables and the papers behind them usually provide numerical bounds, explicit code data, program output, or mathematical proofs. They do not, however, provide proof objects that can be checked by a theorem prover and composed with other certified bounds. 

10.1 Related formalization work 

Coding theory has been formalized before, most substantially in the InfoTheo library for the Rocq/Coq proof-assistant ecosystem [12]. That work develops a broad information-theoretic and coding-theoretic foundation, including linear error-correcting codes, the Hamming metric, minimum dis-tance, and families such as Hamming, Reed–Solomon, and BCH codes, together with LDPC decoder material. The em-phasis of that library is the error-correcting setting: encoding, decoding, minimum distance, and associated bounds. Existing proof-assistant formalizations of coding theory mainly develop the error-correcting, or packing, side of the subject: linear codes, minimum distance, decoding, and clas-sical code families. The present development formalizes the covering side, where the central object is Kq(n, r) and the main proof objects are upper-, lower-, and exactness certificates for finite covers. We are not aware of previous formalizations of 

q-ary covering numbers, the sphere-covering lower bound, or proof-carrying covering-code databases. The library reuses finite-type and Hamming-distance infrastructure where pos-sible, but the covering predicates, certificate interface, and trace replay layer are specific to this development. The q-ary specialization uses Fin n → Fin q for arbitrary q, not only finite-field alphabets. The contribution is also partly architectural. The formal-ization separates upper-bound, lower-bound, and exactness certificates into independent predicates ( KUpper , KLower ,

KSpec ) and connects concrete bounds through a trace-carrying database whose entries replay to Lean proofs. This design is intended to make later computational certificates, includ-ing exhaustive-search, integer-programming, or semidefinite-programming certificates, attachable to the same interface without changing the trusted core. The present development is written in the style of mathlib and reuses its Hamming-distance and finite-type infrastructure [13]. It is not integrated into mathlib , but the definitions are designed to be compatible with eventual upstreaming. The contribution of this paper is therefore not a new the-oretical bound. It is a formal interface that turns standard covering-code ingredients into reusable Lean certificates: ex-plicit upper-bound witnesses, lower-bound predicates, exact-ness statements, certified relation rules, and trace-carrying database entries. In this sense the work sits between the clas-sical covering-code literature and future computational certifi-cates: it formalizes enough of the theory to make published or solver-generated covering-code evidence checkable inside Lean. 

## 11. Discussion and Future Work 

This paper formalizes a foundation rather than a large table of new covering-code bounds. The main design choice is to sepa-rate mathematical claims about Kq(n, r) into upper-bound cer-tificates, lower-bound certificates, and exactness certificates. This separation proved useful throughout the development: explicit codes, counting arguments, elementary exact values, and database entries can be checked independently and then recombined when their numerical bounds meet. Several formalization lessons emerged from this choice. First, treating Kq(n, r) through certificate predicates rather than an immediate minimum function kept upper-bound wit-nesses and lower-bound arguments modular. This matters in the selected exact certificates, where explicit-code upper bounds and independent lower-bound proofs meet only at 

KSpec . Second, the representation Fin n → Fin q made edge cases such as q = 0, n = 0, and r ≥ n part of the ordinary theo-rem statements rather than external conventions. For example, the formal statements distinguish the empty positive-length word space over Fin 0 from the unique length-zero word, so the boundary cases in Table 1 are theorems rather than side conventions. Third, the trace layer showed a useful separation between unverified producers of candidate data and checked Lean proof replay: new sources can be added as local theorems while the database infrastructure propagates them through cer-tified relation rules. In particular, the table generator and the van Laarhoven transcription propose data, but a database entry contributes to a paper claim only after its trace or explicit-code wrapper produces a Lean proof. Formal Foundations and Proof-Carrying Certificates for q-ary Covering Codes in Lean 4 — 18/20 

The current formalization is intentionally conservative. It covers finite Hamming spaces, closed balls, covering predi-cates, elementary exact cases, the q-ary ball-volume formula, the sphere-covering bound, a product construction, and a sub-stantial layer of certified neighbor relations. These results are standard, but their formal versions make all hypotheses and edge cases explicit. In particular, cases such as q = 0, n = 0,and r ≥ n are not handled by informal convention; they are consequences of the definitions used in Lean. The proof-carrying database is the other main outcome. Its purpose is not merely to store numbers, but to store bounds together with derivation traces that replay to Lean proofs. This gives a reproducibility property that ordinary numerical tables usually do not provide: each reported database bound is returned with a trace that Lean can replay to a proof of the corresponding upper- or lower-bound predicate. This should be understood in the trust model of Section 9.2: the table generator is not verified, and native-mode explicit-code leaves rely on Lean’s native evaluation path. The current table is still small as mathematical data, since it contains elementary sources, selected exact covering-number certificates, table-guided upper-bound seeds, and the three van Laarhoven upper-bound certificates, rather than a reproduction of the known covering-code tables. Its value is architectural: adding a new source theorem exposes it to the existing closure machinery for the bounded parameter range currently generated. There are several natural directions for extending the for-malization. The first is to add more of the classical covering-code lower-bound theory, beyond the sphere-covering bound. This includes stronger combinatorial bounds and, in the longer term, LP or SDP bounds. Such results would require additional formal infrastructure, but they fit the existing QaryKLower 

interface. A second direction is to import more explicit covering codes from the literature. The van Laarhoven case study shows the basic workflow for moderate finite instances: extract the code data, encode it compactly, verify the finite covering condition through the switchable proof mode, and register the resulting theorem as a primitive source. Scaling this process to substantially larger codes would require attention to runtime, memory, and possibly more structured certificate formats; it is not automatic from the present encoding alone. Finally, the database closure itself can be strengthened. The direct-product rule is already formalized, but it is not used in the automatic fixpoint closure because of its cost. More selective search strategies, cached product applications, or user-guided trace construction may make product-derived bounds practical without making table generation too expen-sive. Structural rules such as shortening, hole filling, concate-nation, and colored products also suggest a future database layer that stores not only numerical bounds but explicit code structure. Overall, the formalization establishes a machine-checked base for q-ary covering codes in Lean. The next step is not to replace the existing covering-code literature, but to connect it to this base: published constructions, computational searches, and stronger lower-bound arguments can be connected to the same certificate interfaces once suitable Lean statements, certificate formats, and trust boundaries are supplied. 

## A. Artifact and Declaration Map 

Table 6 maps the main paper-level claims to Lean declarations and artifact files. The links point to the fixed artifact commit named in the artifact availability paragraph. Build and regen-eration instructions are in README.md ; all paths are relative to the repository root. 

## B. Database Closure Diagnostics 

As a reproducibility check, the generated table artifact records that lake exe table gen on the current source set gener-ated 52,822 certified table entries and reached a fixpoint after 46 passes. The executable reports “up to 52822 passes” be-cause this is the coarse termination bound used by the fixpoint loop; in this run the table stabilizes much earlier. Here a fix-point pass means one complete sweep of the closure loop, not one of the individual relation relaxations recorded by the trace constructors. Table 7 records the nonzero trace-constructor counts printed by this run. These are recursive node counts over all selected lower-bound and upper-bound traces in the generated table. They are therefore diagnostics of the generated proof ob-jects, not independent counts of mathematical improvements: shared subtraces are counted each time they occur. The gen-erated output also reports zero-count constructors as audit information; such rows mean that the constructor is available in the trace language but is not used by any winning trace for the present source set and parameter range. 

## Acknowledgements 

I thank Prof. Mathar, emeritus professor at RWTH Aachen University, who introduced me to covering codes in his infor-mation theory course. He was also an important mentor to me and taught me mathematical ways of thinking that I have been able to apply throughout my life. This work was partly funded by the Federal Ministry of Research, Technology and Space (BMFTR) in Germany un-der grant number 16KIS2240 of the SUSTAINET-guardian project. 

## Author Contributions 

Andreas Florath carried out the Lean formalization, devel-oped the certificate interfaces and proof-carrying database, extracted and encoded the published covering-code examples, ran the verification, and wrote the manuscript. Formal Foundations and Proof-Carrying Certificates for q-ary Covering Codes in Lean 4 — 19/20 

Paper claim Lean declarations Artifact file Trust boundary Finite Hamming spaces and q-ary words Word , QaryWord , dist , qaryWord_card CoveringCodes/Basic.lean Handwritten Lean; ker-nel checked. Covering predicates and exactness certifi-cates 

Covers , CoversFinset , KUpper , KLower , KSpec ,

KSpec.ofUpperLower CoveringCodes/Covers.lean ,

CoveringCodes/CoveringNumber.lean 

Handwritten Lean; ker-nel checked. Structural exact cases qaryKSpec_zero_radius ,

singleton_covers_of_card_le ,

qaryKSpec_radius_nMinusOne CoveringCodes/SmallCases/ZeroRadius. lean , CoveringCodes/SmallCases/ LargeRadius.lean , CoveringCodes/ SmallCases/RadiusNMinusOne.lean 

Handwritten Lean; ker-nel checked. Ball volume and sphere-covering lower bound 

qaryBallVolume , qaryBallVolume_eq_card ,

sphere_covering_bound CoveringCodes/Bounds/Balls. lean , CoveringCodes/Bounds/ SphereCoveringBound.lean 

Handwritten Lean; ker-nel checked. Product construction and relation rules productCode_covers , upper_radius_mono ,

upper_puncture , upper_direct_product ,

upper_block_group CoveringCodes/Constructions/Product. lean , CoveringCodes/Relations/ 

Handwritten Lean; ker-nel checked. Selected small exact certificates smallLowerBinary251Lower_valid ,

smallLowerBinary262Lower_valid ,

smallLowerTernary331Lower_valid ,

sparseBound_valid CoveringCodes/Database/Sources/ SmallLowerBounds.lean , CoveringCodes/ Database/Sources/SparseSlicer.lean ,

CoveringCodes/Database/Sources/ SmallExplicitUpper.lean 

Handwritten Lean plus finite checks; kernel checked unless native proof mode is selected. Uniform two-block cyclic construction twoBlockCyclic331Upper_valid CoveringCodes/Database/Sources/ TwoBlockCyclic.lean 

Handwritten Lean; ker-nel checked. van Laarhoven upper-bound certificates vanLaarhoven6Explicit ,

vanLaarhoven7Explicit ,

vanLaarhoven8Explicit ,

vanLaarhoven6Upper_valid ,

vanLaarhoven7Upper_valid ,

vanLaarhoven8Upper_valid CoveringCodes/Database/Sources/ VanLaarhoven1989.lean 

Committed data checked by Lean; tran-scription is untrusted. Trace replay and generated query consis-tency 

UpperTrace.valid , LowerTrace.valid ,

BestBounds.consistent ,

bestBounds_consistent CoveringCodes/Database/Trace.lean ,

CoveringCodes/Database/Defs.lean ,

CoveringCodes/Database/GeneratedAPI. lean , CoveringCodes/Database/ GeneratedTable.lean 

Generated traces plus checked replay; gener-ator is unverified. 

Table 6. Map from paper-level claims to checked declarations and artifact files. 

Trace constructor Recursive node count 

UpperTrace.primitive 52,822 

UpperTrace.lengthenFreeN 296,174 

UpperTrace.lengthenDummyN 42,090 

UpperTrace.alphabetExpand 402 

LowerTrace.primitive 52,822 

LowerTrace.radiusBack 3,069 

LowerTrace.lengthBack 6,874 

LowerTrace.lowerBlockGroup 34 

Table 7. Trace-constructor counts reported by lake exe table gen for the current generated database. Counts are recursive over all nodes in the selected traces. 

## Use of AI Tools 

AI-based tools were used during several stages of this work, including drafting and revising parts of the manuscript, ex-ploring formulations of explanatory text, and assisting with software development tasks in the Lean formalization and supporting tooling. All mathematical statements, Lean code, proofs, citations, and manuscript text were reviewed and ac-cepted by the author, who takes full responsibility for the content of the paper. 

## Competing Interests 

The author declares no competing interests. Formal Foundations and Proof-Carrying Certificates for q-ary Covering Codes in Lean 4 — 20/20 

## References 

[1] H. H ¨am ¨al ¨ainen et al. “Football Pools—A Game for Mathematicians”. In: The American Mathematical Monthly 102.7 (1995), pp. 579–588. DOI : 10.1080/00029890.1995.12004624 .[2] Laurent Habsieger. “Ternary Covering Codes”. In: The Electronic Journal of Combinatorics 3.2, R23 (1996). DOI :

> 10.37236/1281

. URL : https://www.combinatorics.org/ojs/index.php/eljc/article/view/v3i2r23 .[3] Richard W. Hamming. “Error Detecting and Error Correcting Codes”. In: The Bell System Technical Journal 29.2 (1950), pp. 147–160. DOI : 10.1002/j.1538-7305.1950.tb00463.x .[4] G ´erard Cohen et al. Covering Codes . Vol. 54. North-Holland Mathematical Library. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1997. 541 pp. ISBN : 978-0-444-82511-7. URL : https://books.google.com/books?id=7KBYOt44sugC .[5] Leonardo de Moura and Sebastian Ullrich. “The Lean 4 Theorem Prover and Programming Language”. In: Automated Deduction – CADE 28 . Ed. by Andr ´e Platzer and Geoff Sutcliffe. Vol. 12699. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2021, pp. 625–635. ISBN : 978-3-030-79876-5. DOI : 10.1007/978-3-030-79876-5_37 .[6] Florence Jessie MacWilliams and Neil James Alexander Sloane. The Theory of Error-Correcting Codes . Vol. 16. North-Holland Mathematical Library. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1977. 762 pp. ISBN : 978-0-444-85010-2. [7] Jacobus H. van Lint. Introduction to Coding Theory . Third. Vol. 86. Graduate Texts in Mathematics. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 1999. XIV+234. ISBN : 978-3-540-64133-9. DOI : 10.1007/978-3-642-58575-3 .[8] P. J. M. van Laarhoven et al. “New Upper Bounds for the Football Pool Problem for 6, 7, and 8 Matches”. In: Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series A 52.2 (1989), pp. 304–312. DOI : 10.1016/0097-3165(89)90036-8 .[9] Patric R. J. ¨Osterg ˚ard. “Upper bounds for q-ary covering codes”. In: IEEE Transactions on Information Theory 37.3 (1991), pp. 660–664. DOI : 10.1109/18.79926 .[10] Dion Gijswijt and Sven Polak. Semidefinite Lower Bounds for Covering Codes . 2025. DOI : 10.48550/arXiv.2504. 01932 . arXiv: 2504.01932 [math.CO] . URL : https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.01932 .[11] Gerzson K ´eri. Tables for Bounds on Covering Codes . URL : https://old.sztaki.hu/˜keri/codes/index.htm 

(visited on 05/17/2026). [12] Reynald Affeldt, Jacques Garrigue, and Takafumi Saikawa. “A Library for Formalization of Linear Error-Correcting Codes”. In: Journal of Automated Reasoning 64.6 (2020), pp. 1123–1164. DOI : 10.1007/s10817-019-09538-8 .[13] The mathlib Community. “The Lean Mathematical Library”. In: Proceedings of the 9th ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Certified Programs and Proofs . CPP 2020. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2020, pp. 367–381. ISBN : 978-1-4503-7097-4. DOI : 10.1145/3372885.3373824 .